# GROMs

Graphic Read-Only Memories (GROMs) are a very peculiar type of ROM
manufactured by Texas Instruments. They have a multiplexed address and
data port, which means you must telll the GROM which address you want to
access and then reach data in there. The GROM has an internal counter
that is automatically incremented each time you access data, so that you
don't need to re-enter the address each time.

[Pinout
](#pinout)[Theory of operation](#operation)

**The TI-99/4A GROMs  **
[GROM port
](#GROM%20port)[GROM headers
](#GROM%20header)[Console GROMs](#GROM%20subroutines)

### Pinout

              +----+--+----+
          AD7 |1 o  G    16| Vss
          AD6 |2    R    15| GR
          AD5 |3    O    14| Vdd
          AD4 |4    M    13| GRC
          AD3 |5         12| M
          AD2 |6         11| MO
          AD1 |7         10| GS
          AD0 |8          9| Vcc
              +------------+

Power supply
**Vcc** +5V
**Vdd** -5V
**Vss** Ground. Actually -0.72V in the TI-99/4A console due to the
following circuit (whose purpose is totally mysterious to me):

    -5V--WWW-----+---+---|Vss    |
         270     |   |   +-------+
          PG1992 ^   = 0.1uF
                 |   |
                Gnd  Gnd
CPU interface
**AD0-AD7** Multiplexed address and data bus.
**M** Direction: Read (high) or Write (low). Connected to DBIN in the
console.
**MO** Access mode: Address counter (high) or GROM data (low). Connected
to A14 in the console (via a TTL buffer).
**GS\*** GROM select. Active low, chip select signal.

**GREADY** Active high: signals that the GROM is ready to operate.
**GRCLK** Clock signal, 3.5 MHz generated by the VDP (pin 38) or 447.4
kHz generated by the VDP (pin. 37). The actual signal is selected via a
jumper in the console. As far as I know, it's the 447.4 kHz that's used.

###  Theory of operation

The GREADY line is necessary because GROMs are slow memory devices: this
line puts the TMS9900 microprocessor on hold until the GROM is ready to
answer.

The M line determines the direction of access: read or write. Obviously
writing data to a GROM is meaningless, but this line is required to
write an address.

The MO pin determines whether the AD0-AD7 port is accessing the address
counter or the data. When MO is low, data can be accessed on a byte-wise
manner. The counter will be incremented after each operation, whether
it's a read or a write. When the top of the GROM is reached, the counter
loops back to zero.

If MO is high, writing operations load an address into the counter. As
an single-byte address would limit GROM sizes to 256 bytes, the address
must be passed as two bytes. The GROM has an internal flip-flop that
keeps track of the bytes entered and "knows" whether it is the first,
least significant byte, or the second. Any data access resets this
flip-flop to "first byte expected".

Reading from the GROM with MO high returns the current value of the
counter \*PLUS ONE\* (don't ask me why). Here also, the lower byte is
passed first, then the high-order byte.

The standard TI-GROM size is \>1800 bytes, wich means any address can be
expressed as a 13-bit number. The remaining 3-bits are used as GROM
identifier: only the GROM with a matchin internal ID will respond to
such an address.

Exemple (address \>54A6):

    0101 0100 1010 0110
    iiiA AAAA AAAA AAAA     Address = >1456, ID = 2

This allows to install upto 8 GROMs on the same data bus: they all
respond to every address operation, latching the current address or
returning the counter value (plus one). But only the GROM with an ID
matching that in the high-order address byte will accept data
operations. Typically, you would have :

    GROM 0: >0000-17FF
    GROM 1: >2000-37FF
    GROM 2: >4000-57FF
    GROM 3: >6000-77FF
    GROM 4: >8000-97FF
    GROM 5: >A000-B7FF
    GROM 6: >C000-D7FF
    GROM 7: >E000-F7FF

That's kind of a waste of space since \>0800 bytes in each GROM are lost
in addressing gaps. I know there were a few cartridges around that had
full-size GROMs of \>2000 bytes, but I'm not sure whether these were
real GROMs or ROMs with an emulation circuitery.

##  The TI-99/4A GROMs

There are three places GROMs can be found in the TI-99/4A: in the
console, in a cartridge or in a peripheral card.

The console contains three \>1800-byte GROMs, with ID numbers 0, 1 and
2. Which means they map at addresses \>0000-17FF, \>2000-37FF, and
\>4000-57FF. These GROMs contain most of the Basic Interpreter, routines
for mathematical operations with real numbers, and DSRs for cassette
tape operations.

In addition, GROMs 3 to 7 (addresses \>6000-FFFF) can be implemented in
cartidges to be plugged in the front panel of the console. For more
information, see my pages (including commented listings) for the
following cartridges: [Editor/Assembler](ea_mod.md),
[Mini-Memory](mm_mod.md) and [TI-Writer](wr_mod.md).

Apart for GRAM cards, the only peripheral card with GROMs I'm aware of
is the p-code card.

####  GROM port

No matter where they are installed, GROMs are always accessed through a
set of 4 addresses in CPU memory. The first address is known as the
"GROM base":

\>9800: read data (GROM base)
\>9802: read address+1
\>9C00: write data
\>9C02: write address

As you may have guessed, addess line A5 (weight \>0400) is connected to
the MO pins of the GROMs. Different addresses are used to read and write
because the TMS9900 always preceedes a write with a read operation. This
would have the annoying result of bumping the GROM counter by two on a
data write operation! The solution is straightforward: a simple TTL
circuitery filters out reading operations at address \>9Cxx. Only the
write goes through so the counter increments only once.

Texas Instruments probably sensed that 8 times \>1800 bytes wouldn't be
enough memory, so they implemented an additional level of subtility in
the TI-99/4A. There are upto 16 sets of 4 addresses that can be used for
GROM access. The GROM base for each set is \>0004 apart: \>9800, \>9804,
\>9808, \>980C ... \>983C. In fact, the address space is free upto
\>9C00, so there could technically be 256 such sets. However the console
ROM routines that search GROMs for subprograms only consider the first
16 bases. But still, this provides an address space of 16 \* 64K, which
is 1 megabyte. Even with gaps, it's not bad for a 1980s computer!

Mind you, the console does not contain any circuitery to decode the GROM
base, which means that the console GROMs can be accessed from any GROM
base. Ditto for the classical TI cartridges like Extended Basic or
Editor/Assembler. But the possibility is here: one could design an
extension device that would let you plug in several cartridges and have
one at base \>9800, another at base \>9804, etc. To my knowledge, such a
gadget was never released, but several GRAM-cards make use of this
trick. For instance the german 128K [GramKarte](gramkart.md) uses bases
\>9800 and \>9820.

###  GROM Header

Optionally, a GROM can start with a standard header that contains lists
of programs, subprograms, DSRs, etc. The first byte in the GROM must be
\>AA to indicate that this GROM contains a header. The structure of such
a header is the following:

Content

&gt;AA indicates a standard header

Version number

Number of programs (optional)

Not used

Pointer to power-up list (&gt;0000 if
none)
Pointer to program list (&gt;0000 if
none)
Pointer the DSR list (&gt;0000 if none)
Pointer to subprogram list (&gt;0000 if
none)

Structure of a list:

    Link to next item --+
    Address             |
    Name length         |
    Name                |
    +-------------------+
    |
    V
    Link to next item: >0000
    Address
    Name length
    Name

    N.B. Name lengh and name are not necessary for power-up routines

If you would like more details on standard headers and how to write
subprograms and/or DSRs, I have a whole [page](headers.md) on the
subject.

####  Console GROMs

A commented listing of the console GROMs can be found in Heiner Martin's
book "TI-99/4A intern" ([pdf file
560k](http://99er.hispeed.com/files/tiintern.pdf)). Here I'm just
providing a brief description of the contents of these GROMs.

Only GROMs 0 and 1 have a standard header, GROM 2 is the continuation of
GROM 1 and has no header.

At the beginning of GROM 0 is a table of subprograms, that contains only
branching instructions (mostly BR, and a few B). The location of these
subprograms may vary among GROM versions, but the table is always at the
same place. The way to use these routine is described in my page on GPL
language, clicking on one of the addresses in the table below will take
you there.

N.B. FAC (floating point accumulator) corresponds to \>834A-8351, ARG
(argument) to \>835C-8363

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
| Mnemonic | Address | Use |
| LINK | [\>0010](gpl2.htm#g@0010) | Subroutine/DSR call: FETCh \>0A/\>08, name ptr in \>8356 |
| RETURN | [\>0012](gpl2.htm#g@0012) | Return from a subroutine/DSR |
| CNS | [\>0014](gpl2.htm#g@0014) | Convert number to string (from FAC to FAC, infos in \>8355-57) |
| STCASE | [\>0016](gpl2.htm#g@0016) | Load title screen character patterns at VDP address in \>834A |
| UPCASE | [\>0018](gpl2.htm#g@0018) | Load upper case character patterns at VDP address in \>834A |
| BWARN | [\>001A](gpl2.htm#g@001a) | Issue warning message |
| BERR | [\>001C](gpl2.htm#g@001c) | Issue error message |
| BEXEC | [\>001E](gpl2.htm#g@001e) | Begins Basic excution: FETCh 4 bytes: address of first and last lines |
| PWRUP | [\>0020](gpl2.htm#g@0020) | System reset |
| INT | [\>0022](gpl2.htm#g@0022) | Convert real to integer (from FAC to FAC) |
| PWR | [\>0024](gpl2.htm#g@0024) | Power-of-ten routine FAC=FAC \* 10^ARG |
| SQR | [\>0026](gpl2.htm#g@0026) | Square root routine FAC=SQR(FAC) |
| EXP | [\>0028](gpl2.htm#g@0028) | Exponentiation routine FAC=e^FAC |
| LOG | [\>002A](gpl2.htm#g@002a) | Logarithm calculation FAC=ln(FAC) |
| COS | [\>002C](gpl2.htm#g@002C) | Cosine calculation FAC=cos(FAC) |
| SIN | [\>002E](gpl2.htm#g@002e) | Sine calculation FAC=sin(FAC) |
| TAN | [\>0030](gpl2.htm#g@0030) | Tangent calculation FAC=tgn(FAC) |
| ATN | [\>0032](gpl2.htm#g@0032) | Arctangent calculation FAC=atn(FAC) |
| BEEP | [\>0034](gpl2.htm#g@0034) | Issue acceptation sound |
| HONK | [\>0036](gpl2.htm#g@0036) | Issue error sound |
| GETSPA | [\>0038](gpl2.htm#g@0038) | Get VDP memory space for a string |
| BITREV | [\>003B](gpl2.htm#g@003b) | Bit reversal routine \>834A: VDP address, \>834C: number of bytes |
| NAMLNK | [\>003D](gpl2.htm#g@003d) | Part of LINK: searches in GROM only |
| PABSPA | [\>003F](gpl2.htm#g@003f) | Check memory space for PAB |
| TOKEN | [\>0042](gpl2.htm#g@0042) | Get next token, set Basic pointers |
| LOCASE | [\>004A](gpl2.htm#g@004A) | Load lower case character patterns |
The address of the following routines may vary, since they are not
included in a vector (branch) table.


NUMBER, OLD, RES,SAVE and EXIT.
0-9..).
Finally, here are some usefull data in GROM. The exact addresses may
also vary according to GROM versions:

|         |                                                            |
|---------|------------------------------------------------------------|
| Address | Contents                                                   |
| \>0451  | Default values of the 8 VDP registers.                     |
| \>0459  | Content of the color table, for title screen.              |
| \>04B4  | Characters 32 to 95 patterns, for title screen.            |
| \>06B4  | Regular upper case character patterns.                     |
| \>0874  | Lower case character patterns.                             |
| \>16E0  | Joysticks codes returned by SCAN.                          |
| \>1700  | Key codes returned by SCAN.                                |
| \>1730  | Ditto with SHIFT.                                          |
| \>1760  | Ditto with FCTN.                                           |
| \>1790  | Ditto with CTRL.                                           |
| \>17C0  | Key codes in keyboard modes 1 et 2 (half-keyboards).       |
| \>2022  | Error messages (with Basic bias of \>60, and lenght byte). |
| \>285C  | Reserved words in Basic, and corresponding tokens.         |
Revision 1. 3/2/00 Preliminary
Revision 2. 3/4/00 OK to release
Revision 3. 5/25/01 Corrected clock and Vss info.

[Back to the TI-99/4A Tech Pages](titechpages.md)
