# The RS232C/PIO interface card

This card features an 8-bit parallel port and two serial ports. The
parallel port does not follow the Centronics standards, but the serial
ports are compatible with the RS232C standard, also known as V.24 in
Europe.

Here is a commented [picture](rs_card.md) of the card, including
instructions for modification of its CRU address (to install two cards
in your PE-box).

**The parallel port  **
[Pinout
](#PIOPinout)[Theory of operation
](#PIOTheory)[Circuitery
](#PIOCircuit)[Sample programs](#PIOSample)

**The serial ports  **
[Pinout
](#SerPinout)[Theory of operation
](#SerTheory)[\_\_Xon/Xoff
](#XonXoff)[\_\_RTS/CTS
](#RTSCTS)[\_\_DST/DTR
](#DSRDTR)[\_\_DCD, RI
](#DCDRI)[\_\_Simplex. duplex, half-duplex
](#Duplex)[\_\_Null-modem connections](#NullModem)

**The TMS9902  **
[Pinout
](#Pinout9902)[Operating the TMS9902
](#Operating9902)[\_Control register
](#ControlReg)[\_Interval register
](#IntervalReg)[\_Rate registers
](#RateReg)[\_Interrupts
](#Interrupts)[\_Error detection
](#Errors)[\_Transmission monitoring
](#Monitoring)[Sample program
](#SerProgram)[Electrical characteristics
](#Electrical)[Timing diagrams
](#Timing)[Circuitery](#SerCircuit)

**CRU interface  **
[CRU map](#CRU%20map)

**Card ROMs  **
[The power-up routine
](#CardROM)[The DSRs
](#RomDSR)[The ISR](#RomISR)

## Parallel port

This port, known as PIO (Parallel Input/Output) on the TI-99/4A card,
features an 8-bit wide bidirectional parallel connection. In addition
there are two extra output lines (SPAREOUT and HANDSHAKEOUT) and two
extra input lines (SPAREIN and HANDSHAKEIN).

### Pinout


Byte &gt;5000

### Theory of operation

Nothing simpler than a parallel port: the sender just puts a byte of
data on the port and it is transfered to the receiver over 8 parallel
wires, one per bit. The only problem is that we need some way to tell
the receiver when a new byte is sent (since we may want to send the same
byte several times, the receiver cannot just monitor the port for
changes). We'll have to use an extra line, on which a pulse (strobe)
will be sent to indicate a new byte. The PIO port has no dedicated
strobe line, but we could use either HANDSHAKEOUT or SPAREOUT for this
purpose. Let's say HANDSHAKEOUT since the name suggests something like
that anyway.

The other control lines can serve several purposes. For instance, the
receiver may need more time to process the incoming data. The
HANDSHAKEIN line may thus be used to provide the sender with an
acknowledgment signal: "OK, I got that. Keep sending data".

The peripheral may also need to signal the sender when an error
condition occured, such a "printer out of paper". The SPAREIN line may
be used for that purpose.

Finally, since the PIO port is bidirectional, we may want to establish a
duplex communication, in which the data lines are used by either device
to send data to the other (this is known as half-duplex, [see
below](#Duplex)). The SPAREOUT line may be used to decide whose turn it
is to send data.

Once again, these are only suggestions: there is no norm for PIO port
connections. The extra lines may well be used to operate special
features of the peripheral controlled via the parallel port.

###  Circuitery

This is the internal wiring for the PIO port in a typical interface
card. For help with the TTL chips, refer to my [TTL page](ttl.md).

              +----------+                       +----------+      PE-Box bus
A12&gt;----------| S0    Q0 |-----&gt;ROMSEL        nc-| A0    S0 |---------&lt;A14
A13&gt;----------| S1    Q1 |-----+PIOOUT-----------| A1    S1 |---------&lt;A13
A14&gt;----------| S2    Q2 |---+ |       +---------| A2    S2 |---------&lt;A12
              |       Q3 |---|+|       |+--------| A3       |
A15&gt;----------| D     Q4 |---|||-------||--------| A4       |
              |       Q5 |---|||-CTS1--||--------| A5       |
      CRU_O*&gt;-| EN*   Q6 |---|||-CTS2--||--------| A6       |
              |       Q7 |---|||-LED+--||--------| A7     Y |----------&gt;CRUIN
RESET*&gt;-------| RST*     |   |||    |  ||        |          |
              |          |   |||    |  || CRU_I*-| EN*      |
              +----------+   |||    |  ||        +----------+
                             |||    |  ||                           PIO Port
         LED  2N3904         +||----|--||------------------------&gt;HANDSHAKEOUT
   +5V ---&gt;|----\|            +|----|--||------------------------&gt;SPAREOUT
                 |-------------|----&#39;  +|---+---------UUU--------&lt;HANDSHAKEIN
                /|             |        |   |  10 nF
               |               |        |   +---||--- Gnd
              Gnd              |        |
                               |        +---+---------UUU--------&lt;SPAREIN
                               |            |  10 nF
                               |            +---||--- Gnd
                               |
PE-Box bus    74LS245          |          74LS373
            +----------+       |       +----------+
DBIN--------| DIR      |       +-------| OE*      |
            |          |    LATCHOUT---| CK*      |             PIO Port
D0----------| A0    B0 |---+-----------| D0    Q0 |----------+---PIO0
D1----------| A1    B1 |---|+----------| D1    Q1 |---------+|---PIO1
D2----------| A2    B2 |---||+---------| D2    Q2 |--------+||---PIO2
D3----------| A3    B3 |---|||+--------| D3    Q3 |-------+|||---PIO3
D4----------| A4    B4 |---||||+-------| D4    Q4 |------+||||---PIO4
D5----------| A5    B5 |---|||||+------| D5    Q5 |-----+|||||---PIO5
D6----------| A6    B6 |---||||||+-----| D6    Q6 |----+||||||---PIO6
D7----------| A7    B7 |---|||||||+----| D7    Q7 |---+|||||||---PIO7
            +----------+   ||||||||    +----------+   ||||||||
                           ||||||||       74LS373     ||||||||
                           ||||||||    +----------+   ||||||||
                           +-----------| Q0    D0 |----------+
                            +----------| Q1    D1 |---------+
                             +---------| Q2    D2 |--------+
                              +--------| Q3    D3 |-------+
                               +-------| Q4    D4 |------+
                                +------| Q5    D5 |-----+
                                 +-----| Q6    D6 |----+
                                  +----| Q7    D7 |---+
                           PIOIN-------| EN*      |
                           LATCHIN-----| CK*      |
                                       +----------+

The PIO port can be accessed at address \>5000 once the RS232 card is
active (this is done by setting CRU bit number 0 to 1). Note however
that the card can either send a byte or receive one, but not both
together. Therefore we must first set the direction of transmission with
CRU bit 1, this bit directly controls the DIR pin of the 74LS245 bus
transceiver that buffers the PR-box bus. To read a byte, first set CRU
bit 1 to '1', then read address \>5000. To send a byte, set CRU bit 1 to
'0', then write a byte to \>5000.

As you can see from the above schematic, data to/from the PIO port is
latched by two 74LS373 D-type latches, one for input and one for
output.The signals controlling these latches are generated by a custom
control chip, with the exception of PIOOUT which comes directly from CRU
bit 1. The custom chip also generates the CRU_I\* and CRU_O\* that
control the CRU interface chips. One of the input of this control chip
is connected to a jumper that allows to select either \>1300 or \>1500
as a CRU base address for the card.

CRU bit 2 controls two of the spares lines: HANDSHAKEIN and
HANDSHAKEOUT. Reading CRU bit 2 returns the current status of the
HANDSHAKEIN line, writting to this bit sets the status of the
HANDSHAKEOUT line.

The SPAREIN and SPAREOUT lines are controled by CRU bit 3, in the same
manner.

Finally, CRU bit 4 is reflected onto itself. Whatever you write to it
should be read back from it. This is a way to determine whether a RS232
card is installed.

CRU bits 5 and 6 control the CTS pins of the RS232 serial port, they'll
be discussed [later](#SerCircuit).

CRU bit 7 turns the card light on in the PE-box, to signal the user that
the card is active. That's an unusual design since most of the time the
light is controlled by CRU bit 0, together with the ROMs. May be TI did
this so that the light can indicate an ongoing transmission, rather than
just telling when the card is on.

###  Sample programs

Here are simple exemples on how to send and receive bytes through the
PIO port, using the HANDSHAKEIN and HANDSHAKEOUT lines for
synchronisation. This is an adaptation of the routines in the card ROM.
The original routines check whether to use PIO or RS232, but I'm not
including the RS232 part here. Also R11 is saved in the scratch-pad, not
in R10.

* It assumes the card CRU is in R12 (&gt;1300).`
PIOUT  MOV  R11,R10        Save return point
       SBZ  1              Set PIO port as output
LP1    TB   2              See if receiver is ready (HANDSHAKEIN low)
       JNE  SK1            Yes, it is
       BL   @CLEAR         Test &lt;Clear&gt; key, abort if pressed
       JMP  LP1            Keep waiting`
SK1    MOVB R0,@&gt;5000      Send the byte
       SBZ  2              Set HANDSHAKEOUT low to signal a byte was sent
LP2    TB   2              Wait till acknowledged (HANDSHAKEIN high)
       JEQ  SK2
       BL   @CLEAR         Test &lt;Clear&gt; key, abort if pressed
       JMP  LP2            Keep waiting`
SK2    SBO  2              Reset HANDSHAKEOUT as high
       B    *R10

The other computer would run the corresponding routine:

* The byte will be placed in R0
* It assumes the card CRU is in R12 (&gt;1300)`
PIOIN  TB   2              Wait for HANDSHAKEIN to be high
       JEQ  SK0            OK: sender is ready
       BL   @CLEAR         Not yet: test &lt;Clear&gt; key, abort if pressed
       JMP  PIOIN          Keep waiting`
SK0    SBO  1              Set PIO port as input
       SBZ  2              Set HANDSHAKEOUT low: we&#39;re ready to receive
LP1    TB   2              Did HANDSHAKEIN become low?
       JNE  SK1            Yes, it did
       BL   @CLEAR         Test &lt;Clear&gt; key, abort if pressed
       JMP  LP1            Keep waiting`
SK1    CLR  R0             The emmiter signaled a byte was sent
       MOV  @&gt;5000,R0      Get byte
       SBO  2              Acknowledge reception
       B    *R10           Return

Of course, these are pretty crude routines. In particular, there is no
way to control the flow, nor to verify the integrity of the tranmitted
data. Furthermore, they require that you first send the number of bytes
to follow:

SENDER LI   R1,NBYTES     Ptr to string of bytes to send
       MOV  *R1+,R2       First word is the # of bytes
       MOV  R2,R0
       BL   @PIOUT        Send the first half of it
       SWPB R0
       BL   @PIOUT        Send the second half
 LP1    MOV  *R1+,R0       Get a byte
       BL   @PIOUT        Send it
       DEC  R2
       JNE  LP1           Next byte
       ...                Done`
NBYTES DATA &gt;0123         Number of bytes to send
       BYTE .....         Bytes to be sent`
*This routine receives a bunch of bytes
RECVER BL   @PIOIN        Receive # of bytes
       MOV  R0,R2         (passed as 2 bytes)
       SWPB R2
       BL   @PIOIN        Get the second half
       MOVB R0,R2
       SWPB R2            Make it a word
*      CI   R2,512        (Optional) check if we have room enough
*      JH   ERROR4        If not issue &quot;memory full&quot; error
       MOV  R2,@SIZE      Save size`
       LI   R1,BUFFER     Ptr to reception buffer
LP2    BL   @PIOIN        Receive a byte
       MOVB R0,*R1+       Save it
       DEC  R2
       JNE  LP2           Next byte
       ...                Done`
SIZE   DATA 0             Number of bytes that will be received
BUFFER BSS  512           Reception buffer
      

The transmission protocol is thus the following:

    Sender                  Receiver
                            Check it bit 2 is high (sender ready)
    Wait for bit 2 low      Set bit 2 low: "ready to receive"
    Send data               Wait for bit 2 low
    Set bit 2 low: "sent"   Get the data
    Wait for bit 2 high     Set bit 2 high: "I got it"
    Set bit 2 high "ready"

Note that in this protocol the sender speaks first. I mean that to send
something we have to wait for the receiver to signal it's ready. Another
scheme would be for the sender to activate HANSHAKEOUT when it wants to
send something and to wait for the receiver to acknowledge the change.
With the first scheme, the sender constantly checks whether the receiver
is ready, with the second scheme the receiver constantly checks whether
the sender requests a transmission.

    Sender                   Receiver
                             Check if bit 2 low (sender calling)
    Set bit 2 low: "hello?"
    Wait for bit 2 low       Set bit 2 low: "ready to receive"
    Send data                Wait for bit 2 high
    Set bit 2 high: "sent"   Get the data
    Wait for bit 2 high      Set bit 2 high: "I got it"

##  Serial ports

TheTI interface card comprises two RS232C serial ports combined in a
single connector.

### Pinout


21, 21, 24, 25

NB Some cards have jumpers to direct the DTR lines to either pin 19 or
18 and 20 or 11.

###  Theory of operation

Contrarily to a parallel port, the serial ports send a byte one bit at a
time. This is of course much slower, but it has one advantage: it
requires only one physical connection (two with the ground reference,
three if you want bidirectional communications). This is much easier to
isolate than a 8-bit bus and as a result serial transmission is much
more reliable and works at longer distances than parallel transmission.
Also think of an infrared connector: for parallel transmission we would
need 8 infrared LEDs of different wavewelength in the emmiter and 8
photo-transistors, each with a filter discriminating for only one LED.
Not impossible, but quite tricky. By contrast, a serial transmission
requires only one LED in the emmiter and one phototransistor in the
receiver. The price to pay is that we need some kind of hardware to
serialize a byte in the sender and pack the received bits back in a byte
in the receiver. Fortunately, there are dedicated chips for that
purpose: UART (Universal Assynchronous Receiver/Transmitter) and USRT
(Universal Synchronous Receiver/Transmitter). There are also USART, i.e.
chips that can operate either synchronously or asynchronously.
Synchronous serial transmission uses one more line to send a clock
signal used to synchronized the sender and the receiver. In a way, it is
already a first step toward parallelism...

Texas Instruments created their own UART chip, the TMS9902, and their
USRT, the TMS9903, for use with the TMS9900 line of products. The
interface card has two TMS9902 each in charge of a serial port.

#### Signal encoding

Here is a typical signal send over an asynchronous serial line:

    ______      _________________________________________________      Logic 1
          | st | D7 | D6 | D5 | D4 | D3 | D2 | D1 | D0 | Pa | Sp |____ Logic 0

#### Data bits

As you can see, 8 data bits were transmitted. This is by no mean an
absolute requirement:, we could have transmitted any number of data
bits: 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. The only requirement is that the
sender and the receiver agree in advance on the number of bits that will
be sent as a "character". Generally it will be 7 or 8. This is because a
byte is 8 bits on a computer. However, the ASCII code is limited to
characters 32-127, thus only 7 bits are needed to transmit pure text and
setting serial transmission as 7-bit words will gain some time (about
10% when compared to 8-bit).. The TMS9902 can handle between 5 and 8
bits. Note that data bits are transmitted starting with the least
significant one, bit 7 according to TI numbering convention.

#### Start bit

You will have noted that the data bits are enclosed between extra bits:
a start bit (st) and a stop bit (Sp). One says that the transmitted
character is "framed" by these control bits. The start bit is necessary
so that the receiver knows where the data starts: as there are only two
voltage levels, there is no way to differentiate an idle line from a
"space" (logic 1 in our exemple). For instance, imagine that we send the
following char 11001010, what the receiver sees is 00 0 0 and how shall
it know whether we meant 00101011, 10010101 or 11001010? In other words,
we must find a way to mark the leading ones. We could use an extra
connection that would provide a clock signal each time a bit is sent:
this is called synchronous transmission and is dealt with by specialized
chips: USRTs. Asynchronous transmissions use a different trick: a start
bit is placed in front of the others: **0**11001010. Now the receiver
sees **0** 00 0 0, knows that the first 0 is the start bit and
interprets the next two spaces as 1s: 11001010. Elegant, isn't it?

#### Stop bit

Similarly, a stop bit is appended at the end of the byte (Sp in the
scheme). A stop bit is merely the absence of a start bit: it just
provides a pause to let the receiver resynchronize with the sender.
Detection of a low signal during that time generally indicates that
sender and receiver are using different transmission speeds and results
in an error condition (framing error). In the above example the stop bit
has the same size than a regular bit, but it is possible for the TMS9902
to send a stop bit equal to 1.5 or 2 regular bits.

The start bit for the next char should come right after the stop bit. If
this does not happen whithin a short time, the receiver interprets it as
a "break" signal.

#### Parity bit

The parity bit (Pa in the scheme) is used to check for the integrity of
the transmission. The hardware counts the bits set as "1" (not including
start and stop) and uses the parity bit to tell the receiver whether the
total of "1"s is odd or even. The receiver performs the same check: if a
bit was mangled during transmission the parity will be wrong. If more
than one bit were affected, there is one chance out of two that the
parity bit will be incorrect. The receiver can then issue an error and
ask the sender to transmit that byte again.

There are 5 possibly parity options:

- Space: The parity bit is always 0.
- Mark: The parity bit is always 1.
- Even parity: The parity bit is 0 if there is an even number of 1s in
  the transmitted char.
- Odd parity: The parity bit is 0 if there is an odd number of 1s in the
  transmitted char.
- No parity: The parity bit is not sent.

The first two types of parities are rarely used and the TMS9902 does not
support them. The next two are very common. With odd parity the number
of "1" bits in the char plus the parity bit itslef will always be odd
(the harware adjusts the parity bit so that this is always true). With
even parity, the number of "1" bits in the char plus the parity bit
itself is always even. Here also, sender and receiver must agree on what
type of parity check will be used.

#### Transmission rate

The last issue is speed. This is not appearant from the diagram above,
but the same sequence of bits could be sent at different speeds. Serial
transmission speeds are measured in bps (bits per second). Transmissions
over a phone line are measured in bauds (the name comes from the french
mathematician J.M.E. Baudot). For low values bauds equal bps, however
there is an upper limit to the number of bauds for a phone line. Todays
high-speed modems manage to overcome that limit by using sophisticated
compression techniques, so you can have 28000 bps or even 56000 bps
modems, but strictly speaking these aren't 28000 or 56000 bauds! Once
more, sender and receiver must agree on the transmission speed prior to
any transmission.

In summary the sender and the receiver must aggree on: transmission
speed, number of bits per char, parity type, number of stop bits. All
this is often expressed in cryptic expressions like: 9600 8N1. This
simply means: 9600 bps, 8 bits per word, No parity, 1 stop bit.

###  Transmission protocols

Now we have a way to reliably transfer one byte over a serial line (or
on a parallel connection), but what if we want to transfer more than
one. How does the sender tell the receiver where the byte stream starts
or ends?

####  Xon/Xoff

One way is to reserve special characters to serve as start-of-message
and end-of-message marks. This is called the Xon/Xoff protocol and is
widely used over so-called "null modems" (i.e.using no other connections
than the data lines). The major pain in the butt, is that the special
characters cannot be part of the transmitted message. That's fine if we
are transmitting text (since ASCII characters only use values from 32 to
127), but we'll be in trouble if we want to send binary data.

Here is a list of all special characters reserved by the ASCII
convention. Those were usefull for teletypes: terminals that could only
send/receive characters. The "keyboard" column indicates the key
combination that will generate that code on the TI-99/4A (keyboard type
4).

|     |      |                                   |          |
|-----|------|-----------------------------------|----------|
| Hex | Code | Meaning                           | Keyboard |
| 01  | SOH  | Start of heading                  | Ctrl-A   |
| 02  | STX  | Start of text                     | Ctrl-B   |
| 03  | ETX  | End of text                       | Ctrl-C   |
| 04  | EOT  | End of tasnmission                | Ctrl-D   |
| 05  | ENQ  | Enquiry                           | Ctrl-E   |
| 06  | ACQ  | Acknowledge                       | Ctrl-F   |
| 07  | BEL  | Generate a beep                   | Ctrl-G   |
| 08  | BS   | Backspace                         | Ctrl-H   |
| 09  | HT   | Horizontal tab                    | Ctrl-I   |
| 0a  | LF   | Line feed (next line)             | Ctrl-J   |
| 0b  | VT   | Vertical tab                      | Ctrl-K   |
| 0c  | FF   | Form feed (next page)             | Ctrl-L   |
| 0d  | CR   | Carriage return (to first column) | Ctrl-M   |
| 0e  | SO   | Shift out                         | Ctrl-N   |
| 0f  | SI   | Shift in                          | Ctrl-O   |
| 10  | DLE  | Data link escape                  | Ctrl-P   |
| 11  | DC1  | Device Control 1                  | Ctrl-Q   |
| 12  | DC2  | Device Control 2                  | Ctrl-R   |
| 13  | DC3  | Device Control 3                  | Ctrl-S   |
| 14  | DC4  | Device Control 4                  | Ctrl-T   |
| 15  | NAK  | Negative acknowledge              | Ctrl-U   |
| 16  | SYN  | Synchronous idle                  | Ctrl-V   |
| 17  | ETB  | End of transmission block         | Ctrl-W   |
| 18  | CAN  | Cancel                            | Ctrl-X   |
| 19  | EM   | End of medium                     | Ctrl-Y   |
| 1a  | SUB  | Substitute                        | Ctrl-Z   |
| 1b  | ESC  | Escape                            | Ctrl .   |
| 1c  | FS   | File separator                    | Ctrl :   |
| 1d  | GS   | Group separator                   | Ctrl =   |
| 1e  | RS   | Record separator                  | Ctrl-9   |
| 1f  | US   | Unit separator                    | Ctrl-8   |

The "Old" and "Save" DSR routines in the TI interface card make use of
SYN, ACQ and NAK (see [below](#RomDSR)).

#### RTS and CTS

A way to overcome the necessity for special characters is to have extra
connections that serve as handshake lines. This introduces some more
parallelism into our serial connection, but it has the advantage of
speeding the transmission a little. The RS232C standard defines two such
pins: RTS send for "Request To Send" ("Can I send you data"), and CTS
stands for "Clear To Send" ("OK, send it").

The sender initiates the transmission by activating the RTS line, waits
for the receiver to answer by activating the CTS line. The sender then
sends data and wait for the receiver to ackowledge it by reseting the
CTS line.

    Sender          Receiver
                    Wait for RTS
    Activate RTS
    Wait for CTS    Activate CTS
    Send data       Receive data
    Reset RTS
    Wait for CTS    Reset CTS

####  DSR and DTR

These two extra lines provide a different type of handshake: they are
meant to insure that both sender and receiver are online and ready to
operate. DSR stands for "Data Set Ready" and is used by the receiver to
indicates that it's ready to operate. DTR stands for "Data Terminal
Ready" and is used by the sender to indicate that it's operational. In
other words, DSR and DTR are used by two devices to establish a
connection. Once this is done, they can begins sending/receiving data
and use the RTS/CTS protocol to control the flow of data.

    Sender                Receiver
                          Set DTR active
                          Check DSR
    Wait for DTR
    Set DSR active

#### DCD, RI and DSRD

Those lines are meant for use with a modem. DCD stands for "Data Carrier
Detected" and is used by the modem to indicate that it is receiving a
carrier, i.e. a sound wave modulated to carry data bits. DCD should
remain active as long as the connection is established.

RI stands for "Ring Indicator" and is used by the modem to indicate that
the phone is ringing. It thus signals that an external device would like
to send data to the computer.

DSRD stands for "Data Signal Rate Detector". It is not always present on
RS232C plugs (it is on PCs 25-pins sockets, but not on 9-pin sockets).
This signal is used by either device to signal a change in transmission
rate.

In the TI card, DCD is internally connected to DTR. RI and DSRD are not
implemented.

#### Simple vs duplex

Two devices can communicate either in simplex mode, half-duplex or
dull-duplex mode.

In simplex mode, one device is a dedicated sender and the other is a
dedicated receiver. By definition there will be only one data line (8
for parallel ports), and possibly some synchronisation lines. Duplex
means that both devices can either send or receive data. With
half-duplex there is still only one data line shared by both devices.
This implies using extra control lines so that the devices can agree on
who is sending and who is receiveing. By contrast, with full-duplex
there are two data lines: one is used by device A to send data to B, the
other is used by B to send data to A. Additional control lines may be
used, but are optional.

This is a typical wiring for simplex connections: for instance a printer
hooked to computer. The printer does not need to send data, at the most
a control line is used so that the printer can tell the computer when
data is arriving too fast.

                   Sender                             Receiver
           Sends data TX----------------------------->RD Receive data
                      RD<-- nc                   nc---TX
        Always active RTS---.....(may be nc).......-->RTS
                      CTS<--.....(may be nc).......---CTS Always active
                      DCD<----------------------------DCD Always inactive
    Active when ready DTR---------------------------->DTR
                      DSR<----------------------------DSR Always active (or active when called)

Half-duplex connections are much more tricky:

                   Sender                             Receiver
           Sends data TX---+----------------------+-->RD Receives data
        Receives data RD<--'                      '---TX Sends data
       Active to send RTS---------------------------->RTS
                      CTS<----------------------------CTS Active to receive
                      DCD<----------------------------DCD Active when needs to send
    Active when ready DTR---------------------------->DTR
                      DSR<----------------------------DSR Always active (or active when called)

Finally, here is an example of a full-duplex connection.

                   Sender                             Receiver
           Sends data TX----------------------------->RD Receives data
        Receives data RD<-----------------------------TX Sends data
        Always active RTS---.....(may be nc).......--->RTS
                      CTS<--.....(may be nc).......---CTS Always active
                      DCD<----------------------------DCD
    Active when ready DTR---------------------------->DTR
                      DSR<----------------------------DSR Always active (or active when ready)

Here is an exemple of a duplex transmission between a computer and a
modem:

    Sender (computer)                   Receiver (modem)
    Standby: (DTR, RTS inactive)        Standby: RI, DCD inactive. (DSR, CTS inactive)
                                        Incoming call: activate RI
    Acknowledge: Active DTR             Activate DSR
                                        Remote connection established: Activate DCD
    Receive data on RD                  Sends data on RD
    Wants to send: Activate RTS         Acknowledge: Activate CTS
    Sends data over TX                  Receives data on TX
    Break connection: inactivate DTR    Or hangup: inactivate DCD or DSR

#### Null-modem connections

A so-called null-modem designs a simple connection in which no control
lines have been implemented. Concretely, the lines are reflected on the
machine they came from, so that it looks like the remote device is
always answering immediately. Here is an example of a null-modem
connection between a computer and a printer. Since the printer won't
send any data to the computer, the RD connection is not necessary. On
the other hand, the printer may need to tell the computer to hold the
flow of data until it had caught up with printing it. To this end, the
BUSY pin on the printer may be connected to DSR on the computer.

                   Sender (computer)                  Receiver (printer)
           Sends data TX----------------------------->RD Receives data
                      RD<--------(optional)-----------TX
                      RTS---,                     ,---RTS
                      CTS<--'                     '-->CTS
                      DCD<--, nc                  ,---DCD
                      DTR---+ nc                  +-->DTR
                      DSR---'                     '---DSR
                      Gnd-----------------------------Gnd

        ( Optionally DSR<----------------------------BUSY Hold transmission while printing)

Here is a more complicated exemple: a null-modem connection between two
computers. In this case, the problem is that RTS in an output pin on
both machines (as opposed to a dedicater receiver, like a printer, where
RTS is an input pin). Conversely DCD is an input pin on both devices
(whereas it is an ouput pin on a modem), etc. In other words, there is a
sender at both end of the connection! We therefore need some creativity
in our wiring if we want to respect the RS232C standards. If we don't
care about that, the previous wiring will do just fine (without the BUSY
line of course).

                   Sender (computer A)               Sender (Computer B)
           Sends data TX----------------------------->RD Receives data
        Receives data RD<-----------------------------TX Sends data
                      RTS---+------------------------>DCD
                      CTS<--'
                      DCD<-----------------------+----RTS
                                                 '--->CTS
                      DTR------------------------+--->DSR
                                                 '--->RI
                      DSR<--+-------------------------DTR
                      RI<---'
                      Gnd-----------------------------Gnd

###  The TMS9902

This UART is meant to be used with a TMS9900 or equivalent CPU. All the
CPU access is performed via the CRU. There are 64 CRU bits available,
some are read-only, some are write-only and some have different meanings
whether read or written to.

The chip contains several registers: a read-only Receive buffer (8 bits)
and a write-only Emit buffer (8 bits) are used to store data
before/after serialisation. Two Rate registers (11 bits) are used to
specify the transmission speed, one for emission, one for reception.
Generally both rates will be equal, but that's not always the case: the
french Minitel system for instance has a high reception speed, but a
slow emission speed. The TMS9902 also comprises an Interval register (8
bits) that can be used as a countdown timer and a Control register (8
bits) used to control several functions of the chip.

The TMS9902 can generate interrupts on its INT\* pin upon several
conditions: when a bit arrives, when the buffer is full, when the timer
fires, etc. These interrupts are fed to the console via the EXTINT line
and processed by the TMS9901 in the console as peripheral interrupts.
The main interrupt service routine (ISR) in the console then scans every
peripheral card for ISR and branches to it. The ISR in the TI interface
card only deals with reception interrupts ([see below](#RomISR)).

#### Pinout

           +----+--+----+
      INT* |1 o       18| Vcc
      XOUT |2    T    17| CE*
       RIN |3    M    16| PHI*
     CRUIN |4    S    15| CRUCLK
      RTS* |5         14| S0
      CTS* |6    9    13| S1
      DSR* |7    9    12| S2
    CRUOUT |8    0    11| S3
       GND |9    2    10| S4
           +------------+

Power supply
**Vcc**: +5V
**GND** : ground

CPU interface
**CE\***: Chip enable. This pin is active (low) when the CRU address
corresponds to the base address of the chip (\>134x or \>138x).
**S0**-**S4**: These 5 input pins serve to select the proper CRU bit to
be accessed.
**CRUIN**: This output line is used by the CPU to read CRU bits from the
TMS9902
**CRUOUT**: This input line is used by the CPU to write to a CRU bit
inside the TMS9902.
**CRUCLK**:. CRU clock: this input line is activated by the CPU upon CRU
write operations, so that the TMS9902 can distinguish them from regular
memory access.
**INT\***: This output line is used by the TMS9902 to send an interrupt
signal to the CPU.
**PHI\***: This pin is used to input the main clock signal.

Serial interface
**RIN**: Serial data input pin.
**XOUT**: Serial data output pin.
**RTS\***: This output pin is used by the TMS9902 to carry a
request-to-send signal to the peripheral.
**CTS\***: This input pin is used by the peripheral to tell the TMS9902
it is clear to send data.
**DSR\***: This input pin is used by the peripheral to tell the TMS9902
that it is active (data set ready).
Note: CTS\* and DSR\* are connected together in the TI card! They get
their input from the DTR (data terminal ready) pin of the RS232
connector.

#### Operating the TMS9902

All four write-only register map to the same CRU bits: the first 11 bits
in the CRU address space of the chip (although some registers use less
than 11 bits). To write a value in a register, you must first tell the
TMS9902 which register you want to access. This is done with CRU bits 11
to 14:

CRU bit 14: Set as 1 to load the Control register. Then load 8 bits,
starting with CRU bit 0.
CRU bit 13: Set as 1 to load the Interval register. Then load 8 bits
starting, with CRU bit 0.

CRU bit 12: Set as 1 to load the Reception Rate register. Then load 11
bits, starting with CRU bit 0.

CRU bit 11: Set as 1 to load the Emission Rate register. Then load 11
bits, starting with CRU bit 0

When bits 11-14 are all 0, the emit register will be accessed: load upto
8 bits, starting with CRU bit 0.

Each time you load the last bit of a register, the address changes so
that the next loading operation will access the next register. Thus, if
we first set bit 14 we can load all registers at a turn, with five
successive LDCR instructions: first the control register, then the
intervall register, then the two rate registers, and finally the
emission register. (Note: You can load both rate registers with a single
LDCR operation, by setting both bit 12 and 11 to 1. The ROM routines in
the TI card make use of this feature).

#### Control register

This register is used to set various transmission parameters.

00: 1.5 stop bit
01: 2 stop bits
1x: 1 stop bit
1: Parity enabled
1: Odd parity
1: 1/4 freq
Record lenght: # of bits per char
000=5, 001=6, 010=7, 011=8,

SBS1-2: Number of stop bits: 00=1.5, 01=2, 10=1.
PENA: Parity enable: 0=no parity, 1=use parity.
PODD: Parity odd/even: 0=even, 1=odd.
RCL0-2: Number of bits per word.000=5, 001=6, 010=7, 011=8, 100=9 (?)
.
CLK4M: Console clock frequency divider. 0= divide PHI\* by 3 to get the
main frequency, 1= divide PHI\* by 4.
\*: Loading SBS1 cause the next load operation to access the interval
register.

Note: I've arranged bits in descending order because the LCDR
instruction always starts loading with the least significant bit of the
source argument. The table thus shows the bits as they need to be in the
source of a LCDR instruction, which makes it easier to use.

#### Emission/Reception rate registers

These registers are used to specify the speed of transmission for
reception:

Frequency divider

And for emission:

Frequency divider

RDR0-9: Divide the main frequency by this number to get the reception
frequency.
RDV8: Further divide the reception frequency by 8.
XDR0-9: Divide the main frequency by this number to get the emission
frequency.
XDV8: Further divide the emission frequency by 8.
\*: Loading RDV8 causes the next load operation to access the emission
rate register.

#### Frequency calculation

The TMS9902 uses the PHI3 clock signal from the console as its main
frequency. The big drag is that there were two types of TI-99 consoles:
some have 3 mHz clocks, others have 2.5 mHz clocks. The latter are
pretty rare, but still we cannot assume that the clock will always be 3
MHz, we must check for that. Fortunately, the clock speed is specified
in the console ROM, at byte \>000C: if this byte is \>30 the console has
a 3 MHz clock, if it's \>28 the clock is 2.5 MHz.

The TMS9902 divides this signal by 2 to derive its main frequency.

If the CLK4M bit is set in the control register, the main frequency is
further divided by 4, otherwise it is divided by 3. This comes handy to
produce some odd rates that are not powers of two.

If the RDV8 (or XDV8) bit is set in the rate register, the frequency is
further divided by 8.

Finally, the frequency is divided by the number specified in the rate
register, to get the transmission speed.

In summary, the transmission frequency can be calculated as:

    Ftrans =        Fmain
             2  * (8**RDV8) * RDR

    Fmain = Phi3 or Phi3 depending on CLK4M
             3       4

    Phi3 = 3 Mhz or 2.5 Mhz depending on the console

Here are the values to program in the rate register for the most common
transmission rates (as used in the interface card ROM):

2.5 MHz
3.0 MHz


####  Interval register

This register can be used as a countdown timer.

Timer: # of cycles to countdown (1 for 64 clock
ticks)

TMR0-7: countdown value.
\*: Loading TMR7 causes the next load operation to access the reception
rate register.

The counter will be decremented every 64 tick of the main clock (i.e
Phi/3 or Phi/4). When it reaches 0, CRU bit 25 is set to 1. If timer
interrupts were enabled (by writing 1 to CRU bit 20), an interrupt is
sent and CRU bit 19 is set to 1 (as well as CRU bit 31, which is set by
any interrupt). The countdown then resumes from the original value. If
it reaches 0 again and the previous countdown was not acknowledged (.e.
CRU bit 25 was not reset by writing to CRU bit 20), then an error occurs
and CRU bit 24 is set to 1. This way the user can know that the timer
has cycled more than once.

In summary:
Writing to CRU bit 20 enables/disables timer interrupts.
Loading the Interval register starts the timer (or stops it if 0 is
loaded).
CRU bit 25 is set to 1 when the time has elapsed.
CRU bit 24 is set to 1 when the time has elapsed and CRU bit 25 was
already 1.
CRU bit 19 is set to 1 when the time has elapsed and timer interrupts
were enabled.
CRU bit 31 is set to 1 if an interrupt occured.
CRU bits 19, 24 and 25 can be reset by writing to CRU bit 20.

For a 3 MHz console, the minimum interval on the timer is 64 micoseconds
and the maximum is 16.32 milliseconds, with a resolution of 64
microseconds. By setting the CLK4M bit in the control register, these
values become 48 microseconds to 12.24 milliseconds with a resolution of
48 microseconds. I'll leave it to you to do the calculations for a 2.5
MHz console.

####  Interrupts

There are many conditions that may cause the TMS9902 to issue an
interrupt . Each type of interrupt can be enabled/disabled by writing to
a specific CRU bit. Also, each type of interrupt will set a specific CRU
bit, which allows the user to determine the cause of the interrupt. Most
of the time, reading the culprit bit will clear the interrupt condition
and reset that bit.

|                            |            |             |                           |
|----------------------------|------------|-------------|---------------------------|
| Interrupt issued when      | Set with   | Signaled by | Signal cleared by         |
| Reception buffer is loaded | CRU bit 18 | CRU bit 16  | CRU bit 18                |
| Emission buffer is empty   | CRU bit 19 | CRU bit 17  | Loading emission register |
| Timer reached 0            | CRU bit 20 | CRU bit 19  | CRU bit 20                |
| CTS or DSR changed         | CRU bit 21 | CRU bit 20  | CRU bit 21                |
| Any of the above occured   | Always set | CRU bit 31  | Reseting that interrupt   |

####  Error detection

The TMS9902 can detect a variety of error conditions and several CRU
bits are used to indicate which error occured.

|  |  |  |
|----|----|----|
| Error condition | Signaled by | Signal cleared by |
| Reception error (any of the next 3) | CRU bit 9 | Error condition is cleared |
| Parity error | CRU bit 10 | Receiving a char with good parity |
| Overflow (new bit received when buffer full) | CRU bit 11 | Reception buffer is read |
| Frame error (0 received instead of stop bit) | CRU bit 12 | Receiving a char with correct stop bit |
| Timer error (time elapsed twice) | CRU bit 24 | Writing to CRU bit 20 |

####  Transmission monitoring

If you need more sophisticated control over the transmission than the
automated function provided by the UART, more CRU bits can be used for
this purpose.


1: all bits have arrived
(Reset by writing to bit 18)
0: A char has been loaded in the buffer
1: Nothing is emitted (XOUT is high)
(Reset by writing to bit 21)
interval timer decremented every 2nd cycle (32x faster)
0: Inactivate RTS once emission is completed (and break bit is 0)
interrupts)
Empty emission and reception buffers, clear timer. No break,
RTS=high
No operation allowed for 11 clock cycles.

###  Sample programs

Here is an example on how to set transmission parameters. For routines
that [send](#send) and [receive](#receive) a byte, see below. For
examples dealing with the interval register, see the [interrupt
routine](#RomISR).

      LI   R12,&gt;1300               CRU address of first interface card (use &gt;1500 for the second card, if any)
      SBO  0                       Turn card on
      AI   R12,&gt;0040               Address of first TMS9902 (use &gt;0080 for the second chip)
      SBO  14                      We want to load the control register
      LI   R0,&gt;0800                Divide Phi3 by 4
      ORI  R0,&gt;3000                Odd parity
      ORI  R0,&gt;0300                8 bits per char
      ORI  R0,&gt;8000                1 stop bit
      LDCR R0,8                    Load the control register
      SBO  12                      Let&#39;s skip the interval register
      LI   R0,&gt;009C                This boils down to 2400 bps
      LDCR R0,11                   Load the reception rate register
      LDCR R0,11                   Load same value in the emission rate register
      B    *R11

###   Electrical characteristics

#### Absolute maximum ratings

    Supply voltage:        -0.3 to +10V
    Input/output voltages: -0.3 to +10V
    Power dissipation:            0.55W
    Free air temperature:    0 to 70 `C
    Storage temperature:  -65 to 150 `C

####   Recommended operating conditions

|                          |         |     |     |      |
|--------------------------|---------|-----|-----|------|
| Parameter                | Min     | Nom | Max | Unit |
| Supply voltage Vcc       | 4.5     | 5   | 5.5 | V    |
| Supply voltage Vss       | .       | 0   | .   | V    |
| High-level input voltage | 2       | .   | Vcc | V    |
| Low-level input voltage  | Vss-0.3 | .   | 0.8 | V    |
| Free air temp            | 0       | .   | 70  | 'C   |

####  Characteristics under recommended conditions


I= -200 uA
2.2
Vcc

###  Timing diagrams

#### CRU output

        |tc=300-500 |_____   12-30  12-30    _____
    ____/  a  \  b  /    |\____|/    |\_____/     \________ PHI*
              __                      __           |25|
    X|  bit address n        |   bit address n+1      |XXXX CRU address
     |    >180 ns   |
         \ >150 ns  |                                       CE*
                      ___                     ___
    _________________/ c \___________________/   \_________ CRUCLK
              __                      __
    X|  bit data out n       |   bit data out n+1    |XXXXX A15/CRUOUT
     |    >180 ns   |

    a) 0.45 - 0.55 Tc
    b) 0.45 - 0.55 Tc
    c) >0.37 Tc

####  CRU input
    ____/     \     /     \_____/     \_____/     \________ PHI*
              __                      __
    X|  bit address n        |   bit address n+1      |XXXX CRU address
     |    <260 ns  |
         \ <240 ns |                                        CE*
                   |
                   |                                        CRUCLK
              __   |                   __
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX| bit n |XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX|bit n+1|XXXXXX CRUIN

###  Circuitery

What I did not mention above, is that a serial port uses different
voltage values than a parallel port. Typically, for a parallel port a
logic 1 is +5V and a logic 0 is 0V (gnd). However, for serial input
connections a logical 1 is any voltage between +3 to +15V and a logical
0 is an voltage between -3V and -15V. For output connections, a logical
1 is +5V to +15V and a logical 0 is -5V to -15V. These values are known
as EIA signal level and allows for better transmission over longer
distances. However, it necessitates special chips to handle the
interface, since standard TTL chips only operate in the range 0 to +5V.
The PE-Box power supply provides peripheral cards with +5V, +12V and
-12V, therefore the serial ports on the card will generate +12V and -12V
signals. They should however be able to input higher voltage values.

The interface chips used for output are two operational amplifiers,
TL082 and TL084, powered by +12V and -12V instead of +5V and 0V. For
input, the card uses a 75189 Schmidt-trigger inverter. Other
possibilities for output would be: SN75150, SN75188, or MC1488. And for
input: SN75152, SN75154, SN75189, SN75189A, MC1489, or MC1489A. All
these guaranty transfer rates upto 20 kB over a 50-foot connection.

              +------------+      75189   330 Ohm        4.7K
A10&gt;----------|S0      RIN |-------o&lt;|----www------------------------------&lt;RD-1
A11&gt;----------|S1      CTS*|---,  75189   330 Ohm  ,------www-----+5V
A12&gt;----------|S2      DSR*|---+---o&lt;|----www------+-----------------------&lt;DTR-1
A13&gt;----------|S3          |                       &#39;-------||-----Gnd
A14&gt;----------|S4          |  ,--www--+5V      36K     10 nF
A15/CRUOUT&gt;---|CRUOUT      |  |  1.8K       ,--www---,
CRUCLK&gt;-------|CRUCLK      |  |    10K      |   |\   |  150 Ohm   150 Ohm
CRUIN&lt;--------|CRUIN   XOUT|--+----www------+---|-\__+---www---+---www-----&gt;TX-1
              |            |               ,----|+/            &#39;---||--Gnd
 SEL*---------|CE*         |               |    |/TL084           10 nF
              |            |  ,--www--+5V  |   36K
PHI3*&gt;--------|PHI*        |  | 1.8K       | ,-www---,
           +--|INT*        |  |    10K     | |  |\   |  150 Ohm   150 Ohm
           |  |        RTS*|--+----www-----|-+--|-\__+---www---+---www-----&gt;DCD-1
           |  +------------+               +----|+/            &#39;---||--Gnd
           |                               |    |/TL084            10 nF
  INT*     |______74LS21                   |
  on other  +5V===|)--+            200 Ohm |        200 Ohm
  TMS9902-------&#39;     |      Gnd----www----+--------www---+5V
                      |                    |
EXTINT*&lt;--------------&lt;|---Gnd             |    |\TL082
                   74LS125         10K     &#39;----|+\__+---www---+---www-----&gt;CTS-1
  Cru bit 5-------------------+----www------+---|-/  | 150 Ohm |   150 Ohm
  (6 for CTS-2)               |             |   |/   |         &#39;---||--Gnd
                              | 1.8K        &#39;--www---&#39;             10 nF
                              &#39;--www--+5V      36K                 1.8K
                                                           +12V----www-----&gt;DSR

Notes
This circuit exists in duplicate: one per TMS9902 chip (except for
DSR: there is only one).
The SEL\* signals are provided by the custom control IC that decodes the
CRU addresses.

##  CRU map

Let's summarize the above in a map of the CRU bits used to access the
interface card. Remember that the card base address is \>1300. It can be
set as \>1500 if you have two cards in a PE-Box, but for this you need
to physically modify the card. Nothing too difficult, just locate the
resistor labelled R5 and move it to the place labelled PTH1 (it should
be just below it). Here is a [picture](rs_cru.jpg) of a card bearing
such a modification.

The second card will respond to DSRs RS232/3, RS232/4 and PIO/2, but
only if the first card is also installed, otherwise it will respond to
RS232, RS232/2 and PIO, just as if it were not modified.

Bits 0 through 7 control the card directly. The two TSM9902 are
installed at \>1340 and \>1380 respectively. In the table below, I chose
to renumber the bits from 0 in each chip, since this makes things easier
to understrand. Furthermore, this is generally what the programmer will
do: set R12 as \>1340 instead of \>1300 so that LCDR and STCR
instructions can be used to load and read registers.


Value to load in selected register (11 bits)
(reset by writing to bit 18)
(reset by loading emission register)
(reset by writing to bit 20)
(reset by writing to bit 21)
(reset by writing to bit 18)
(reset by loading emission register)
(shift register is empty)
(reset by writning to bit 20)
(reset by writning to bit 20)
(reset by wrinting to bit 21)
Input bits 22,23=1, bits 13,21,25=0

## The card ROM

The TI interface card comprises 4096 bytes of ROM which provides the
software to use with the card. The ROM contains an interrupt routine and
several DSR (device service routines) for file access. There is also a
power-up routine, but no subprograms. You'll find a commented
disassembly listing of the whole ROM on my
[download](download.htm#disass) page.

### The power-up routine

This is an extremely simple routine. All it does is:

- Turn the light on.
- Set PIO as output (`SBZ 1`)
- Set HANDSHAKEOUT high (`SBO 2`).
- Reset both TMS9902 (by writing 1 to bit 31 in each chip).
- Turn the light off.
- Return with `B *R11`.

### The DSRs

The card ROM contains the following DSRs:

**PIO**, **PIO/1**: Access to parallel port
**PIO/2**: Ditto, on second card
**RS232**, **RS232/1**: Access to first serial port on first card
**RS232/2**: Access to second serial port on first card
**RS232/3**: Access to first serial port on second card
**RS232/4**: Access to second serial port on second card

As you can see, the DSRs are written to take into account the
possibility of a second interface card installed in the PE-Box. A
resistor on the second card is used to change its CRU address from
\>1300 to \>1500 (although the software will work with any pair of CRU
addresses). When only one card is installed, it answers to the first set
of DSRs, no matter what its CRU is. When two cards are present, the one
with the highest CRU address answers to the second set of DSRs.

Changing the CRU address involves a small hardware modification:
transplanting a resistor. It is described in
[here](rs_card.htm#CRU%20modif).

When the console scanning routine calls a DSR, it has some key values
stored at well defined places:

\>8356 points to the first character after the DSR name in the VDP
memory. This often will be a decimal point.

\>8354 contains the size of the DSR name, not counting any decimal pont.

R12 (\>83F8) contains the CRU of the card being called. This information
is also saved in word \>83D0

R2 (\>83E4) contains the address of next link in the chain of DSR
routines. This information is also saved in word \>83D2

R9 (\>83F4) contains the address of the routine being called.

R11 (\>83F6) contains the return address to the scanning routine

R1(\>83E2) contains the number of time a routine with that name was
called. Normally it is 1.

- The card DSR check the DSR name in VDP memory to know if the user is
  accessing the first card (RS232, RS232/1, RS232/2, PIO or PIO/1) or
  the second (RS232/3, RS232/4, PIO/2).
- If the call is meant for the second card, the routine checks the
  content of R1 and returns with B \*R11 if it is 1. This will cause the
  DSR scanning routine to keep looking for cards with the same DSR name
  in their ROMs.
- If the content of R1 matches the card number, the DSR is executed.

Several modifiers can be appended to the DSR name, using decimal points
as separators:

**.BA=xxx** Where xxx is the transmission speed. Legal values are: 110,
300, 600, 1200, 2400, 4800 and 9600.

**.DA=n** Where n is the number of bits per word. Accepted values are 7
and 8.

**.TW** Causes two stop bits to be used. Otherwise only 1 is issued. No
provision is made to use 1.5 stop bit, although the TMS9902 would allow
for it.

**.CH** Check for parity upon reception.

**.PA=c** Parity type. Where c is N: no parity, E:even parity or O: odd
parity.

**.CR** Prevents a character 0d (CR) from being appended to each record
sent.

**.LF** Prevents a character 0a (LF) and 0d (CR) from being appended to
each record sent.

**.EC** Echo off. When echo is on each character received will be sent
back to the sender.
.**NU** Append 6 null characters (\>00) to the end of Dis/Var records.

These parameters are stored in the scratch-pad RAM at the following
addresses:

\>834A-8353: Copy of PAB
\>8354-5: Length of DSR name
\>8356-7: Point after DSR name in the PAB (in VDP memory)

\>8358: Echo off (.EC)
\>8359: No CR nor LF (.CR)
\>835A: No LF (.LF)
\>835B: Check for parity (.CH)
\>835C: Add null chars (.NU)
\>835D: Use interrupts (opcode \>80)

\>835E-F: Current rec \#
\>8360-1: Current rec size
\>8364-D: Five buffers to save R11, used by different routines.

\>83DA-B: Copy of the Control register contents
\>83DE-F: Copy of the Interval register contents

The DSR executes the following file operations: Open, Close, Read,
Write, Load, and Save.The other opcodes (Rewind, Delete, Scratch and
Status) generate an I/O error 3. In addition, the DSR accepts a special
"Open" opcode, \>80, that turns interrupts on.

If you are not familiar with PABs and their opcodes, [read this
first](headers.htm#PAB).

#### Interrupt (\>80)

- Set the interrupt flag (\>835D)
- Branch to Open

#### Open (\>00)

- Set default flags as 300 7O1 (300 bps, 7 bits/char, odd parity, 1 stop
  bit).
- Check for modifiers after the DSR name and adjust flags accordingly.
- For PIO: set it as ouput with HANDSHAKEOUT high
- For RS232: reset the adequate TMS9902, then set its transmission
  parameters (with interrupts if opcode was \>80).
- Set default record length as 80, if 0 was specified in the PAB.
- Generate an I/O error 2 if the record type is relative.
- Branch to Exit.

#### Close (\>01)

- Set default flags as 300 7O1 (300 bps, 7 bits/char, odd parity, 1 stop
  bit).

- Check for modifiers after the DSR name and adjust flags accordingly.

  **Exit**:

- Update the error flags (byte 1) and the character count (byte 5) in
  the PAB

- Set HANDSHAKEOUT high, PIO as output, turn the light off

- Return with INCT R11, B \*R11

#### Read (\>02)

- Set default flags as 300 7O1 (300 bps, 7 bits/char, odd parity, 1 stop
  bit).
- Check for modifiers after the DSR name and adjust flags accordingly.
- If the file is internal, receive 1 byte (record size), generate an I/O
  error 4 if it's larger than the record length specified in the PAB.
  Return if it is 0.
- If file is display, get the record size from the PAB.
- Receive the above number of chars. For each one do:
  - If the file is internal (fixed of variable), save the char in VDP
    buffer.
  - If the file is display variable and echo is off: save the char in
    VDP buffer unless it is a CR. If it is CR update the number of
    characters received and branch to Exit.
  - If the file is display variable and echo is on: emit that byte then
    save it in VDP buffer, unless it is CR (\>0D), DEL (\>7F) or FF
    (\>12).
    - If it is CR, update the number of characters received and branch
      to Exit.
    - If it is FF, emit an end-of-record (\>0D, \>0A and 6x \>00
      according to the .CR, .LF and .NU flags), then emit all bytes
      received until now.
    - If it is DEL, decrement the VDP buffer pointer, emit the
      previously received char. If it was CR emit an end-of-record. Then
      receive next char.
  - If the file is display fixed and echo is off: save the char in the
    VDP buffer.
  - If the file is display fixed and echo is on: emit that byte then
    save it in VDP buffer, unless it is DEL (\>7F) or FF (\>12).
    - If it is FF, emit an end-of-record (\>0D, \>0A and 6x \>00
      according to the .CR, .LF and .NU flags), then emit all bytes
      received until now.
    - If it is DEL, decrement the VDP buffer pointer, emit the
      previously received char. If it was CR emit an end-of-record. Then
      receive next char.
- Branch to close

#### Write (\>03)

- Set default flags as 300 7O1 (300 bps, 7 bits/char, odd parity, 1 stop
  bit).
- Check for modifiers after the DSR name and adjust flags accordingly.
- If the file is internal, emit the number of characters to be sent.
- Send the specified number of characters from the VDP buffer.
- If the file is Dis/Var emit an end-of-record:
  - Emit a CR (\>0D) unless the .CR flag was specified.
  - Emit six NULL (\>00) if the .NU flag was specified.
  - Emit a LF (\>0A) unless the .CR or the .LF flag was specified.
- Branch to Close.

#### Save (\>06)

Save is meant to transfer a whole file (in program format) to another
TI-99/4A that will receive it with Load. Load sends the SYN character to
signal the beginning of a transmission however since "program" files can
contain any character, none can be reserved as an end-of-file mark.
Therefore, Save must always send first the number of bytes that will
follow (sent as a 2-byte number).

To ensure that transmission worked well, Save and Load use a CRC (cyclic
redundency check) checking mechanism. Load sends either the ACK or the
NAK character to indicate whether thr CRC matches or not.

- Set default flags as 300 8N1 (300 bps, 8 bits/char, no parity, 1 stop
  bit).
- Check for modifiers after the DSR name and adjust flags accordingly.
  Only the following modifiers are recognized: .BA=n, .PA=c, .TW, .CH
- For PIO: set it as ouput with HANDSHAKEOUT high.
- For RS232: reset the adequate TMS9902, then set its transmission
  parameters
- Synchronize with Load on the other machine:
  - Receive characters until it is SYN (char \>16).
  - For PIO, wait 14 usec (Why??)
- Send size:
  - Emit the number of chars to be sent, as two bytes (msb, then lsb).
  - Calculate the CRC.
  - Emit the CRC as two bytes.
  - Receive 1 char. If it is not ACK (\>06), send size and CRC again.
- Send the file by chunks of 256 bytes:
  - Emit a chunk of 256 bytes (or what is left in last chunk).
  - Calculate the CRC.
  - Emit the CRC as two bytes.
  - Receive 1 char. If it is not ACK (\>06) send the same chunk (and
    CRC) again. With PIO, first wait for 14 usec.
- Branch to Close

#### Load (\>05)

- Set default flags as 300 8N1 (300 bps, 8 bits/char, no parity, 1 stop
  bit).
- Check for modifiers after the DSR name and adjust flags accordingly.
  Only the following modifiers are recognized: .BA=n, .PA=c, .TW, .CH
- For PIO: set it as ouput with HANDSHAKEOUT high
- For RS232: reset the adequate TMS9902, then set its transmission
  parameters
- Synchronise with Save on the other machine:
  - Emit the SYN character (\>16)
  - Wait for HANDSHAKEIN (for PIO) or for DSR and character received
    (for RS232). Meanwhile check if Fctn-4 is pressed, abort if it is.
  - If nothing happens, emit SYN again and keep waiting.
- Receive number of bytes to be transfered:
  - Receveive two bytes.
  - Calculate the CRC.
  - Receive two bytes: CRC for the previous two.
  - If if does not match the calculated one, emit NAK (char \>15) and
    try again.
  - Check if the number of byte fits the buffer size. If not issue I/O
    error 4. If ok emit ACK (char \>06).
- Receive the appropriate number of bytes, 256 bytes at a time:
  - Receives a chunk of 256 bytes (or what is left in the last chunk).
  - Calculate the CRC
  - Receives two bytes: CRC for the previous 256. For PIO: wait 14 usec
    (Why?)
  - If CRC does not match the calculated one, emit NAK (\>15) and try
    again. Else emit ACK (\>06).
- Branch to close

Correspondence between Load and Save

    Save                          Bytes       Load
    Emit                    ---1--->     Wait for 
    Emit size  <------------+    ---2--->     Receive size     <-------------------------+
    Emit CRC                |    ---2--->     Receive CRC                                |
                            |                 If CRC wrong: emit  and retry---------+
    Receive 1 char          |    <--1---      else: emit 
    If not , resend----+

    Emit 1 chunk <----------+    --256-->     Receive 1 chunk  <--------------------------+
    Emit CRC                |    ---2--->     Receive CRC                                 |
                            |                 If CRC wrong: emit  and receive same --+
    Receive 1 char          |    <--1---      else: send                             |
    If not  send same--+                                                             |
    Next chunk -------------+                 Next chunk ---------------------------------+
    Close                                     Close
CRC calculation routine

* R6 contains the byte received/emmited.
* The CRC value is in R9, it is initialised as &gt;FFFF (SETO R9)`
DOCRC  MOV  R6,R1
       ANDI R1,&gt;FF00     Mask irrelevant bits
       XOR  R1,R9        XOR with CRC value
       MOV  R9,R1
       SRL  R1,4         Shift by 4
       XOR  R9,R1        XOR with new CRC value
       ANDI R1,&gt;FF00     Mask irrelevant bits
       SRL  R1,4         Shift by 4
       XOR  R1,R9        XOR with same CRC value
       SRC  R1,7         Shift by 7 (circular)
       XOR  R1,R9        XOR with new CRC value
       SWPB R9           Shift by 8 (circular)
       B    *R11

If I'm not mistaken, this should correspond to a polynomial of
x15+x11+x7+1. See the disk controller
page for a [discussion](disks.htm#CRC) of CRCs.

####  Serial reception routine

The following is an adaptation of the reception routine in the card ROM.
The original routine checks whether to branch to use PIO or RS232, but
I'm only including the RS232 part. Also the two tests between LP1 and
SK1 are in a separate subroutine. Finally, R11 is saved in the
scratch-pad, not in R10.

* It sssumes the port was properly set, and R12 contains the CRU base
* of the appropriate TMS9902 (i.e. &gt;1340 or &gt;1380)`
REC1BY MOV  R11,10           Save return point
LP1    TB   27               Test DSR pin (i.e. DTR on the connector)
       JNE  SK1              Line is high
       TB   21               Line is low: test receive buffer
       JEQ  SK2              A byte is ready
SK1    BL   @CLEAR           Check &lt;Clear&gt; key, abort if pressed
       JMP  LP1              Else keep waiting`
SK2    CLR  R6               A byte was received
       STCR R6,8             Get it
       SBZ  18               Reset buffer bit 21 (use SBO 18 to allow interrupts)
       TB   11               Was there an overflow?
       JEQ  ERROR6           Yes: I/O error #6
       TB   12               Was there a frame error (stop bit read as 0)?
       JEQ  ERROR6           Yes
       MOVB @PARCHK,R11      Flag: shall we check parity?
       JEQ  SK3              No
       TB   10               Yes: was there a parity error?
       JEQ  ERROR6           Yes
SK3    B    *R10             Return

####  Serial emission routine

The following is an adaptation of the reception routine in the card ROM.
The original routine checks whether to branch to use PIO or RS232, but
I'm only including the RS232 part. Also R11 is saved in the scratch-pad,
not in R10.

* It sssumes the port was properly set, and R12 contains the CRU base
* of the appropriate TMS9902 (i.e. &gt;1340 or &gt;1380)`
EMI1BY MOV  R11,R10          Save return point
LP2    SBO  16               Set RTS pin low (DCD on the connector)
       TB   27               Test DSR pin (DTR on the connector)
       JNE  SK5              It&#39;s high: no answer yet
       TB   22               It&#39;s low: is emission buffer empty yet?
       JEQ  SK6              Yes: send previous byte now
SK5    BL   @CLEAR           Test &lt;Clear&gt; key, abort if pressed
       JMP  LP2              Keep waiting`
SK6    LDCR R6,8             Load next byte in emission buffer
       SBZ  16               Set RTS/DCD high (effective once buffer is empty)
       B    *R10             Return

The expected connections are as follow:

          Sender                           Receiver
    TMS9902  Connector                Connector   TMS9902
    XOUT----->TX ----------------------->RD------>RIN
    RTS*----->DCD----------------------->DTR--+-->DSR*
    DSR*<--,                                  '-->CTS*
    CTS*<--+--DTR<-----------------------DCD<-----RTS*
    RIN<------RD<------  optional  ------TX<------XOUT

and the transmission protocol is the following:

    Sender                            Receiver
                                      Check if DTR is low
    Set DCD low
    Wait for DTR to be low
    Wait until done with previous     Wait for byte to fully arrive
    Send next byte                    Read byte
                                      Check for transmission errors
    Will set DCD high once done

To send a whole bunch of bytes, there are two options: 1) First send the
number of bytes to be sent, then send them or 2) send all bytes then
generate a break signal by keeping the line inactive for a time.

###  The ISR

The interrupt service routine in the peripheral card is fairly
primitive, some may even call it buggy...

- It checks whether a reception interrupt occured, by testing CRU bit 16
  (reception interrupt, should be 1).
  - If not, it checks if any interrupt came from the card, by testing
    CRU bit 31 (is 1 if an interrupt was issued).
    - If not, it returns with `B *R11, `after enabling interrupts in the
      second TMS9902 chip (nasty bug!).
    - If yes, it resets the card by executing the power-up routine (big
      pain in the butt!). Returns with `B *R11`
  - If a reception interrupt occured, the ISR saves the incoming byte in
    a circular buffer in VDP memory. The buffer address is in word
    \>8300-01, its size in byte \>8302.
    - It gets a buffer write pointer from byte \>8304 (offset from
      \>8300) and increments it (or clears it, if it equals \>8302).
      This points to the next available space in the circular buffer.
    - It checks the buffer read pointer in byte \>8303 (offset from
      \>8300). If it was reached the buffer is full: the ISR replaces
      the previous byte with \>FE as a flag, and returns without
      modifying \>8304.
    - Else it gets the incoming byte from CRU bits 0-7 and saves it in
      the buffer.
    - If a reception error occured, it places \>FF in the buffer instead
      of the byte.
    - It returns with` B *R11.`

As you can see, this routine is buggy: if the interrupt did not come
from the card, the second TMS9902 in the card will start generating
interrupts whether this was intended or not!

Apart from this bug, the main trouble with this routine is that, once
more, the TI engineers decided that we won't be allowed to use other
features than the ones they have planed us to use. That's what I call
the MacIntosh philosophy: "The average user is a complete moron. Let's
make sure he/she won't be allowed to fool around with our wonderfull
machine". In the present case, it means that we cannot use the interval
timer to generate an interrupt. We could set the timer, but when the
interrupt occurs nothing will happen: the chip will just be reset.

There is a way around that for those of us that have an Horizon Ramdisk:
the guys who wrote the DSRs for that disk did an incredibly good job and
they notably allow the user to install a custom ISR on disk. If we set
the CRU address of the Ramdisk below that of the RS232 card, its ISR
will be called before that of the RS232. It could thus check whether the
interrupt was issued by the timer on the interface card. The routine
should install itself in the memory expansion since the custom control
chip may require interface card to be turned on (with CRU bit 0) for
proper operation, which forces us to first turn off the Ramdisk.

Assuming all the above, here is what we would do:

SETIMR LI   R12,&gt;1340          Address of first TMS9902 on card 1
       SBO  31                 (Optional) Reset it
       LI   R0,&gt;xxxx           Delay = &gt;xxxx * 64 * 333 ns (for a 3 MHz console)
       SBO  13                 Next load will be in interval timer
       LCDR R0,11              Load value
       SBO  20                 Enable timer interrupts
       B    *R11`
* ISR installed in Ramdisk memory
MYISR  LI   R3,TIMISR          Points to timer ISR
       LI   R4,&gt;2000           Where to put it, in memory expansion
       LI   R5,ENDISR-TIMISR   Size in words
LP0    MOV  *R3+,*R4+          Copy ISR to low memory expansion
       DECT R5
       JNE  LP0
       B    @&gt;2000             Branch to it`
* This will run in the low memory expansion
TIMISR SBZ  0                  Turn Ramdisk off
       MOV  R12,R10            Save for return
       LI   R12,&gt;1300          CRU address of the card
       SBO  0                  Turn card on
       LI   R12,&gt;1340          CRU address of the first TMS9902
       TB   31                 Does the interrupt come from this chip?
       JNE  NOTME              Nope
       TB   19                 (Optional) Was it a timer interrupt?
       JNE  NOTME              Let the RS232 card ISR deal with reception interrupts
       TB   24                 Was there an overflow (missed interrupt)?
       JEQ  ERROR2             Do something if more time than expected has elapsed
       ...                     Do what needs to be done when timer fires
       SBO  20                 Reset flag (by enabling timer interrupts again)
*      C    *R11+,*R11+        Do not scan other cards (must do SBZ 0 ourselves)`
NOTME  LI   R12,&gt;1300          CRU address of the card
       SBZ  0                  Turn interface card off
       MOV  R10,R12            Restore old CRU base
       SBO  0                  Turn ramdisk back on
       B    *R11               Leave ISR
ENDISR
Preliminary version. 3/8/99. Not for release
Revision 1. 5/31/99 Checked serial subroutines, ok to release
Revision 2. 6/16/00 Got the TMS9902A manual! Added timing + electical
characteristics, corrected pinout.

Revision 3. 8/28/00 Added a note on the ISR bug.
Revision 4. 8/26/01 Added links to pictures page.
Revision 5. 5/2/03 Corrected a typo: bit PIOOUT should be '0' for
output.
[Back to the TI-99/4A Tech Pages](titechpages.md)
