
# TMS9901 Programmable systems interface

[Pinout](#Pinout)
[CRU interface](#CRU%20interface)
[Interrupts interface](#interrupt%20interface)
[The internal timer](#Timer)

**The TMS9901 in the TI-99/4A**
[Functions](#Ti99)
[CRU map](#CRU%20map)

**Operating the TMS9901**
[In I/O mode](#Operating)
[In timer mode](#Timer%20mode)
[Fun stuff](#Fun)

[Timing diagrams](#Timing%20diagrams)
[Electrical characteristics](#Electrical)

## Introduction

As indicated by its name, this highly versatile chip is in charge of
interfacing a CPU, in our case the TMS9900, with the outside world. It
communicates with the CPU via 32 bits in the CRU address space, and with
the outside world with 21 pins that can be programmed as input, output,
or interrupt pin. It also has an internal timer that can be used to
generate interrupts or just to measure elapsed time.

##  Pinout

           +----+--+----+ 
     RST1* |1 o       40| Vcc 
     CRUOUT|2         39| S0 
     CRUCLK|3    T    38| P0 
     CRUIN |4    M    37| P1 
       CE* |5    S    36| S1 
     INT6* |6         35| S2 
     INT5* |7    9    34| INT7*/P15 
     INT4* |8    9    33| INT8*/P14 
     INT3* |9    0    32| INT9*/P13 
      PHI* |10   1    31| INT10*/P12 
    INTREQ*|11        30| INT11*/P11 
       IC3 |12        29| INT12*/P10 
       IC2 |13        28| INT13*/P9 
       IC1 |14        27| INT14*/P8 
       IC0 |15        26| P2 
       Vss |16        25| S3 
     INT1* |17        24| S4 
     INT2* |18        23| INT15*/P7 
        P6 |19        22| P3 
        P5 |20        21| P4 
           +------------+

CRU interface
**S0-S4.** These input pins tell the TMS9901 which CRU bit the CPU wants
to read/write. On the TI-99/4A these pins are controlled by the address
bus, lines A10-A14.

**CE\*** Chip enable. This input pin decodes the remainder of the CRU
address and becomes active (low) when the TMS9901 is the addressed
device. Remember that the TI-99/4A only decodes part of the address bus,
lines A3-A5!

**CRUIN** This output pin carries the current CRU bit to the CPU each
time CE\* is active.

**CRUCLK** This input pin receives the CRU clock pulse emmited by the
TMS9900 for CRU ouput operations.

**CRUOUT** This input bit imports the current CRU bit from the CPU
provided CE\* is active (low) and a pulse is received on CRUCLK

Interrupt interface
**INTREQ\*** This output pin sends an interrupt request signal to the
CPU by becoming active (low).

**IC0-IC3** These output pins carry the interrupt number (1 through 15)
to the CPU. Note that this feature is not used on the TI-99/4A which
considers all interrupts as level 1. These pins are thus not connected
in the TI-99/4A console.

**PHI\*** This pin receives a clock signal that will be used to
synchronize the emission of interrupts and to decrement the counter in
the timer. In the TI-99/4A console, this pin receives the PHI3\* clock
signal.

I/O interface
The TMS9901 features 21 pins that can be programmed as input, output or
interrupt pin. An interrupt pin is a pin that generates an interrupt
when it is low. Not every pin have the three functions though. In fact,
I/O pins can be divided into three groups:

**INT1\*-INT6\*** Pure input pins. These pins cannot be programmed as
output pins. They can be used as input pins (by setting their interrupt
mask as 0 with CRU bits 1-15, which is the default) or as interrupt pins
(by setting their mask as 1). Pins are numbered according to the
interrupt code they place on pins IC0-IC3. Note that there is no INT0\*
pin.

**P0-P6** Pure I/O pins. These pin cannot generate interrupts. When the
TMS9901 is reset they are programmed an input pins by default. They can
be turned into output pins by writting data to them via CRU bits 16 and
higher. Once they are programmed as output they won't revert to input
pins until the TMS9901 is reset. Caution: trying to force current into a
pin programmed as output may damage the TMS9901!

**INT7\*/P15-INT15\*/P7** Versatile pins. These pins have the 3
capabilities: by default they are input pins. They can be turned into
interrupt pins by setting their mask as 0, or as output pins by writing
to them.

**RST1\*** This input pin resets the TMS9901, clears any interrupts,
disables the timer and turns all pins into input pins.

Power supply
**Vcc** +5V
**Vss** Ground

##   CRU interface

The TMS9901 interacts with the CPU via 32 CRU bits. So why do we need 32
bits to control 21 pins? That's because these pins have multiple
functions. In addition, the meaning of most these bits is very different
when read or written.

Bit 0 is used to select the timer mode. When it equals 1, the TMS9901 is
in timer mode and bits 1-15 have a special meaning (see
[below](#CRU%20time%20mode)), when 0 it starts the timer (if needed) and
bits 1-15 are used to control I/O pins, just as bits 16-31.

Bits 1-15 are used to read the status of the 15 interrupt pins (whether
they are used as interrupt pin or as input pin). Writing to one of these
bits does not output any data, but sets the interrupt mask for the
corresponding pin: writing a 1 results in issuing interrupts when the
pin is held low. The interrupt trigger is synchronized by the PHI\* pin.

Bits 16-31 are used to read the status of the 15 programmable I/O pins,
provided they are used as input (or interrupt) pins. Note that the 8
versatile pins INT7\*/P15 through INT15\*/P7 can be read either with
bits 7-15 or with bits 23-31. Writing to CRU bits 16-31 turns the
corresponding pins into output pins and places the bit values on the
pins.
 

|  |  |  |  |
|----|----|----|----|
| Bit | R12 address | Meaning when read | Effect when written |
| 0 | \>0000 | Mode, should be 0 | 1: switch to timer mode |
| 1 | \>0002 | Value of the INT1\* pin (#17) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT1\* (1:int) |
| 2 | \>0004 | Value of the INT2\* pin (#18) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT2\* |
| 3 | \>0006 | Value of the INT3\* pin (#9) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT3\* |
| 4 | \>0008 | Value of the INT4\* pin (#8) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT4\* |
| 5 | \>000A | Value of the INT5\* pin (#7) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT5\* |
| 6 | \>000C | Value of the INT6\* pin (#6) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT6\* |
| 7 | \>000E | Value of the INT7\*/P15 pin (#34) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT7\*/P15 |
| 8 | \>0010 | Value of the INT8\*/P14 pin (#33) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT8\*/P14 |
| 9 | \>0012 | Value of the INT9\*/P13 pin (#32) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT9\*/P13 |
| 10 | \>0014 | Value of the INT10\*/P12 pin (#31) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT10\*/P12 |
| 11 | \>0016 | Value of the INT11\*/P11 pin (#30) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT11\*/P11 |
| 12 | \>0018 | Value of the INT12\*/P10 pin (#29) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT12\*/P10 |
| 13 | \>001A | Value of the INT13\*/P9 pin (#28) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT13\*/P9 |
| 14 | \>001C | Value of the INT14\*/P8 pin (#27) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT14\*/P8 |
| 15 | \>001E | Value of the INT15\*/P7 pin (#23) | Set interrupt mask for pin INT15\*/P7 |
| 16 | \>0020 | Value of the P0 pin (#38) | Set output value of pin P0 |
| 17 | \>0022 | Value of the P1 pin (#37) | Set output value of pin P1 |
| 18 | \>0024 | Value of the P2 pin (#26) | Set output value of pin P2 |
| 19 | \>0026 | Value of the P3 pin (#22) | Set output value of pin P3 |
| 20 | \>0028 | Value of the P4 pin (#21) | Set output value of pin P4 |
| 21 | \>002A | Value of the P5 pin (#20) | Set output value of pin P5 |
| 22 | \>002C | Value of the P6 pin (#19) | Set output value of pin P6 |
| 23 | \>002E | Value of the INT15\*/P7 pin (#23) | Set output value of pin P7 |
| 24 | \>0030 | Value of the INT14\*/P8 pin (#27) | Set output value of pin INT14\*/P8 |
| 25 | \>0032 | Value of the INT13\*/P9 pin (#28) | Set output value of pin INT13\*/P9 |
| 26 | \>0034 | Value of the INT12\*/P10 pin (#29) | Set output value of pin INT12\*/P10 |
| 27 | \>0036 | Value of the INT11\*/P11 pin (#30) | Set output value of pin INT11\*/P11 |
| 28 | \>0038 | Value of the INT10\*/P12 pin (#31) | Set output value of pin INT10\*/P12 |
| 29 | \>003A | Value of the INT9\*/P13 pin (#32) | Set output value of pin INT9\*/P13 |
| 30 | \>003C | Value of the INT8\*/P14 pin (#33) | Set output value of pin INT8\*/P14 |
| 31 | \>003E | Value of the INT7\*/P15 pin (#34) | Set output value of pin INT7\*/P15 |

###  Timer mode

|  |  |  |  |
|----|----|----|----|
| Bit | R12 address | Meaning when read | Effect when written |
| 0 | \>0000 | Mode, should be 1 | 1: switch to timer mode |
| 1 | \>0002 | Content of Read register (LSBit) | Data to write to Clock register (LSBit) |
| 2 | \>0004 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 3 | \>0006 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 4 | \>0008 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 5 | \>000A | Ditto | Ditto |
| 6 | \>000C | Ditto | Ditto |
| 7 | \>000E | Ditto | Ditto |
| 8 | \>0010 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 9 | \>0012 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 10 | \>0014 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 11 | \>0016 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 12 | \>0018 | Ditto | Ditto |
| 13 | \>001A | Ditto | Ditto |
| 14 | \>001C | Ditto (Most Significant Bit) | Ditto (Most Significant Bit) |
| 15 | \>001E | Value of the INTREQ\* pin (#11) | 0: Software reset (aka RST2\*) |

##  Interrupt interface

With the TMS9901, interrupts are level-triggered, i.e. they are
triggered by a low voltage on the interrupt pins INT1\*-INT15\* (as
opposed to edge-triggered interrupts, that would react to a voltage
change from high to low). The chip stores the status of these pins in
internal latches on the falling edge of the clock pulse on the PHI pin,
at each and every clock cycle. This means that the interrupt status will
be forgotten at the next PHI pulse if the pin does not remain low.

For each pin, the latched bit is combined with a mask bit that
determines whether the interrupt is active or ignored. These mask bits
are set by the CPU via the CRU interface: a "1" enables the interrupt, a
"0" masks it out.

On the rising edge of the same clock pulse, the duly masked bits are
processed by the priority encoding logic. At the falling edge of the
next clock pulse, the INTREQ\* becomes active, and the code of the
lowest active interrupt is placed on IC0-IC3. Provided there is an
unmasked interrupt, of course.

The CPU can sense the status of the interrupt lines by reading the
corresponding CRU bits. It is therefore possible to determine which line
caused the interrupt. This is especially usefull in the TI-99/4A where
the IC0-IC3 pins are not connected, and all interrupt are considered as
level 1. Note that the CRU bit is not influenced by the mask bits: it
accesses the INTx\* pins directly. The CPU can also sense the status of
the INTREQ\* pin, by reading CRU bit 15 while in timer mode (i.e. after
writing a "1" to CRU bit 0). This way, one can implement a polling
strategy: interrupts are disabled at the CPU level (with LIMI 0), and
the CPU periodically checks CRU bit 15 to determine whether an
"interrupt" is pending.

In addition, an internal timer can also generate interrupts. These are
assigned priority level 3, and the INT3\* pin becomes a pure input pin
(i.e. a low level on it will not generate interrupts). The mask bit for
the timer is the same as for the INT3\* pin. To clear the timer
interrupt condition you must write to CRU bit 3. It does not matter
whether you are writing a 0 or a 1, which allows you to leave interrupt
3 active or to disable it, while still clearing the pending condition.

##   The internal timer

The TMS9901 contains an internal decrementer that can be used as a
timer, in conjunction with two registers: the Clock register and the
Read register, which together constitute the CRU interface.

             +----------------+ 
    CRU ====>| Clock register | 
             +----------------+ 
                     || 
                     \/ 
             +----------------+  =0
    PHI* --->| Decrementer    |-----> Interrupt 3 
     64      +----------------+
                     || 
                     \/ 
             +----------------+ 
    CRU <====| Read register  | 
             +----------------+

A 14-bit long data word (i.e. \>0000-\>3FFF, or 16384) can be loaded in
the clock register via CRU bits 1-14, when the chip is in timer mode.
CRU bit 1 is the least significant bit, CRU bit 14 is the most
significant bit.

The TMS9901 can be returned to I/O mode by writing a 0 to CRU bit 0, or
by accessing a bit higher than 15. If at that point the Clock register
contains a non-zero value, it will be copied in the decrementer and
decremented at every 64th clock pulse on the PHI\* pin. The new value
will constantly be copied to the Read register.

To access the current value of the decrementer, the TMS9901 should be
placed in timer mode again (CRU bit 0 set to 1). This will freeze the
update of the Read register, but will not stop the decrementer. The
contents of the Read register can be read from CRU bits 1-14 with a STCR
instruction.

Placing the TMS9901 in I/O mode again will resume updating of the Read
register. However, if any bit between 1 and 14 is written to while in
timer mode, the decrementer will be reinitialized with the current value
of the Clock register. This is nice because it means that it is not
necessary to reload all 14 bits in the Clock register: since they
haven't changed, writting one of them (such as the least significant
one) is enough to reload the whole data word.

Once the decrementer reaches zero, it reloads itself with the value
stored in the Clock register and continues its decrementing job. At this
point, it also issues a level 3 interrupt. If the corresponding mask was
set to 1 (with CRU bit 3, in I/O mode), the INTREQ\* line will become
active to signal the interrupt to the CPU. Note that while the
decrementer is working, pin INT3 cannot generate interrupts: it can
still be read, but even a low level will not trigger interrupts. The
decrementer will not generate any more interrupts after that one, unless
re-enabled by entering and exiting timer mode.

The decrementer can be stopped by simply writing a zero to the leaving
register, and leaving timer mode.

Note that it is NOT possible to leave the chip in timer mode in order to
store a data word in the clock register and access it later from the
Read register without having it decremented. That's because memory
operations are likely to place an address in the range 16-31 on lines
A10-A15. Although this is not a CRU operation, it is seen by the TMS9901
and results in exiting timer mode and decrementing will begin.

In timer mode, CRU bit 15 has different meanings when read or written
to: reading bit 15 returns the current status of the INTREQ\* pin. This
could be used to check whether an interrupt request is currently sent to
the CRU. Writing a 0 to CRU bit 15 resets the TMS9901. This is not the
same as activating the RST1\* line though, as this type of software
reset (aka RST2\*) only resets all I/O pins as pure input pins, but does
not affect the timer.

##   The TMS9901 in the TI-99/4A

In the TI-99/4A console, the TMS9901 is used for many purposes:

Scanning the keyboard.

Signalling VDP and external interrupts to the CPU.

Controlling the cassette tape recorders (motors, input and output).

Placing sound data directly to the monitor's speaker.

#### Keyboard scanning

The keyboard is a matrix of six columns of eight keys. Each row of keys
is connected to an input pin on TMS9901 (pins INT3\* to INT10\*/P12).
The TMS9901 uses 3 output pins (P2 to P4) to controls a 74LS138 decoder
and select a column (column 6 and 7 select the joysticks). If a value of
0 appears on one of the input pins, it means that a key is down at the
intersection of this row and the currently selected column. An extra
output pin controls the alpha-lock key to avoid the phenomenon of
phantom keys (when three keys are pressed, that are placed at three
corners of a rectangle in the matrix, the one on the fourth corner
appears to be pressed).

#### Interrupt handling

Two pins are programmed as interrupt pins and receive the interrupt
request from the VDP (pin INT2\*) and peripheral cards in the PE-Box
(pin INT1\*). If we enable the corresponding mask, the interrupt will be
sent to the CPU via the INTREQ\* pin.

#### Tape recorder control

The TMS9901 uses two output pins to control the motors on two cassette
tape recorders: pin P6 for cassette1 and INT15\*/P7 for cassette2. The
motors are not connected directly to the chip, mind you: there are
isolated via opto-isolators (which means that the polarity of the plug
is important!). Pin INT13\*/P9 is used to output sound to the cassette,
this will be digital sound of course, modulated via an electronic
circuit in the console. Another electronic circuit takes its input from
the cassette recorder and feeds a digital level of 0 or 1 into input pin
INT11\*/P11.

#### Direct sound

Pin INT14\*/P8 is connected to the AUDIOIN pin of the TMS9919 sound
chip. This allows to send digital sound directly to the speaker, without
having to rely on the sound generators in the sound chip. I heared there
is a program around that makes use of this feature to generate
sophisticated sounds, but I can't recall which it is (any
[help](feedback.htm#Info) appreciated).

###   CRU map of the TMS9901

Here is a map of the TMS9901 in the CRU address space of the TI-99/4A.
Column 3 indicates whether the pin should be programmed as input (I),
output (O) or interrupt (I+)
 



##   Operating the TMS9901

### I/O mode

To read the status of a pin, simply read the corresponding CRU bit. Note
that you can read several bits at a time with a STCR instruction.
 

       TB   29          Read pin INT9*/P13 
       JNE  TEST        Do something 
       LI   R12,&gt;000A   CRU address for pin INT5* 
       STCR R1,8        Read pins INT5* to INT12*/P10

To use a pin as an interrupt pin, set its mask to one. A low level on
this pin will now trigger an interrupt on the next PHI\* pulse. You will
still be able to read the pin, which can be used by the ISR to determine
where the interrupt came from. To clear the interrupt status, write 1
again to its CRU bit. To disable interrupts from this pin, write 0 to
the bit.
 

       SBO  4           Enable interrupt (level 4) for pin INT4* 
        ... 
       TB   4           Read that pin (if = 0 an interrupt has occured) 
       JEQ  TEST        Pin is high: no interrupt 
       SBO  4           Clear interrupt condition, but leave mask enabled 
       ...
       SBZ  4           Disable interrupt

To use a pin as an output pin, just write a value to it, it will appear
on the pin (0=low, 1=high). A pin that has been used once for output
cannot be used for input any more, until the TMS9901 is reset.
 

       SBZ  23          Set pin INT15*/P7 low 
       LI   R12,&gt;0026   CRU address for pin P3 
       LI   R1,&gt;1300    Value to write 
       LDCR R1,5        Write to pins P3 to INT15*/P7

###  Timer mode

Let's first use the decrementer to measure the time elapsed between two
events.
 

       SBO  0           Enter timer mode 
       LI   R1,&gt;3FFF    Maximum value
       INCT R12         Address of bit 1 
       LDCR R1,14       Load value 
       DECT R12         There is a faster way (see below) 
       SBZ  0           Exit clock mode, start decrementer 
       ... 
EVENT2 CLR  R12 
       SBO  0           Enter timer mode 
       STCR R2,15       Read current value (plus mode bit)
       SRL  R2,1        Get rid of mode bit
       LDCR R12,15      Clear Clock register, and exit timer mode 
       S    R2,R1       How many cycles were done? 

R1 now contains the number of times the decrementer was decremented.
Since this is synchronized by PHI3\* on the TI-99/4A and we know PHI3\*
has a period of 333 ns (for a 3 MHz clock), we can easily calculate the
elapsed time. One unit on the decrementer represents 64 clock periods,
thus 64\*333 = 21.3 microseconds. This is the resolution of the timer,
the smallest time that it can measure.

The other limitation is that the maximal possible time is 16383\*64\*333
ns = 349.2 milliseconds. To time longer intervals we have three
possibilities:

1.  Periodically read the timer, save the read value, and reset the
    timer to its initial value. Add up all the elapsed times calculated
    this way.
2.  Same as above, but let the timer reload itself. If the value read is
    larger than last time it was read, the timer has reached \>3FFF and
    looped back to \>0000.
3.  Set the timer to generate interrupts every 100 ms (or any suitable
    interval) and use the ISR to count those interrupts. After reading
    the final value, just add the number of time the timer has fired
    times 100 msec.

The first two method are trivial variants of the above, but method
number 3 is slightly trickier. The problem is that the ISR on the
TI-99/4A is written in stone, I mean in ROM. When it sees that an
interrupt does not come from the VDP, it assumes (and does not check)
that it comes from a peripheral card. Thus, when our timer fires, the
ISR will call all interrupt routines on peripheral cards, but NOT the
ISR hook at \>83C4. Now, if you have an Horizon Ramdisk, or any card
with RAM at \>4000, this is an ideal way to simulate peripheral
interrupts and/or to use the timer.

Otherwise, the only solution we have is to set the flag bit that will
cause the ISR to enter cassette management routines, no matter where the
interupt came from. Unfortunately, these routines do not preserve the
return address! The only way we can get around this problem is by
enabling interrupts at only one location in our program, and have our
ISR return to it.
 

* It expects a delay value in R0
* and a branch vector in R1 (or &gt;0000 to use a forever loop)
TIMEON SOCB @H20,@&gt;83FD        Set timer interrupt flag bit
       MOV  R12,@OLDR12        Preserve caller&#39;s R12 
       CLR  R12                CRU base address &gt;0000 
       SBZ  1                  Disable peripheral interrupts 
       SBZ  2                  Disable VDP interrupts 
       SBO  3                  Enable timer interrupts
       MOV  R1,@&gt;83E2          Zero if we want to wait in a forever loop 
       JEQ  EVERLP      
       SETO @&gt;83E2             Flad: we intend to branch elsewhere 
       MOV  R1,@&gt;83EC          Set address where to go
EVERLP SLA  R0,1               Make room for clock bit
       INC  R0                 Set the clock bit to put TMS9901 in clock mode 
       LDCR R1,15              Load the clock bit + the delay 
       SBZ  0                  Back to normal mode: start timer
       MOV  @OLDR12,R12        Restore caller&#39;s R12
       B    *R11`
* This routines &quot;unhooks&quot; the timer interrupt
TIMOFF SZCB @H20,@&gt;83FD        Clear timer interrupt flag bit 
       MOV  R12,@OLDR12        Preserve caller&#39;s R12    
       CLR  R12                CRU base address &gt;0000 
       SBO  1                  Enables peripheral interrupts 
       SBO  2                  Enables VDP interrupts 
       SBZ  3                  Disables timer interrupts
       MOV  @OLDR12,R12        Restore caller&#39;s R12
       B    *R11`
OLDR12 DATA 0                  Temporary buffer for caller&#39;s R12
H20    BYTE &gt;20
       EVEN`
* This is our ISR. All it does is to count the number of times it is called.
OURISR INC  @COUNT             Count the number of times the timer fired 
       LWPI &gt;83C0              Back to interrupt workspace (R13, R15 unchanged) 
       MOV  @RETPT,R14         Get the return point (as R14 contains OURISR) 
       RTWP                    Return to IRET`
COUNT  DATA 0                  The event counter
RETPT  DATA 0                  The return point`
* This is the main program. It starts the timer with a delay of 1/3 second
* and uses the value in COUNT to time a process.
MAIN   LI   R0,&gt;3D09           That&#39;s 333 usec
       LI   R1,OURISR          That&#39;s our hook
       CLR  @COUNT             Reset the counter
       BL   @TIMEON            Start the timer
       ... 
       LI   R11,IRET           Desired ISR return point
       MOV  R11,@RETPT         From now on, timer interrupts will return at IRET                     
LOOP   LIMI 2                  Enable interrupts
IRET   LIMI 0                  Disable interrupts (Our ISR returns here)
       ...                     Perform the action to be timed
       JNE  LOOP               Until done
       BL   @TIMOFF            Stops the timer
       MOV  @COUNT,R1          Divide by 3 to get the number of seconds
       ...

Because we have set the cassette flag bit, the console ISR will enter
the cassette management routine after any interrupt, without checking
where it came from. That routine will branch at the address provided in
\>83EC. The way it branches, is by copying \>83EC in R14 of the
interrupt workspace and performing a `RTWP`. This will of course
overwrite the return address (that was in R14), and enter OURISR with
the user workspace and status.

OURISR just increments a counter and returns to the caller.
Unfortunately, it has no way to know where to return. So it returns at
IRET, i.e. the` LIMI 0` instruction. This has to be to correct return
point, since the interrupt can only occur after a `LIMI 2`. The drawback
is that there must be a frequently executed loop in the timed process,
into which we can stuff these two instructions. Note that they could be
more than one loop: all we have to do is to set the correct return point
before each `LIMI 2`.

####  An improved ISR ?

One thought that occured to me was that OURISR could test whether the
interrupt came from the VPD, a peripheral card or the timer and branch
to the proper address accordingly (\>0918 for peripheral cards, \>094A
for the VDP). Before doing so, it would place the return address in R14
of workspace \>83C0.

I tried that and it did not work. I had a hard time to figure out why,
but finally I got it: when the cassette ISR branches to OURISR with a
`RTWP `it restores the status register from R15 in the \>83C0 workspace.
This will automatically restore the interrupt mask of 2 that was set by
the `LIMI 2` instruction. But the cassette ISR did not necessarily clear
the interrupt condition: it clears timer interrupts, but not VDP or
peripheral interrupts. Therefore, another interrupt will occur
immediately, before the first instruction of OURISR can be executed. And
we are trapped in a forever loop, whithin the console ISR!

####  Jeff Brown's solution

This solution was suggested to me by Jeff Brown, the man behind the
[interrupt mod](intmod.md). His idea is very elegant: if we fail to
acknowledge VDP interrupts any further interrupt will be considered as
VDP, so we could use the "interrupt hook" address \>83C4 to branch to
our own routine after any interrupt type. Only problem: VDP interrupts
are acknowledged by the ISR in the console ROMs, and this is done before
it calls our routine. Fortunately, there is a way out: reseting the
interrupt is done by reading the VDP status at \>8802, which is coded as
MOVB
@\>FC00(R15),@\>837B in the console ROMs. R15 in the GPL
workspace contains the address of the VDP "read address" port \>8C02. So
all we need to do is to scramble this value, and the console ISR won't
be able to clear interrupts any longer.

Of course, there are unwanted side-effects to this techniques:

- We won't be able to detect genuine VDP interrupts. So if you need
  automated sound list processing, sprite automotion, or a functional
  \ key, you'll have to code these within your program.
- Any routine that expects to find \>8C02 in R15 of the GPL workspace
  won't work properly. This may include some of the routines in the
  console ROMs (such as the GPL intepreter). Again, you will need to
  have your own version of these if you need them.

This being said, click [here](jeff.txt) for a complete listing of Jeff's
solution.

### Fun stuff

A look at the CRU map above may have suggested you some interesting
possibilities. For instance:

#### Use the extra pins

First of all, there are three unused pins on the TMS9901 that we could
make use of: INT12\*/P10 connected to a 10 KOhm pullup resistor would
make a nice input (or interrupt) pin. Then P0 and P1 could be used
either as input or as output pin.

What for? Well, to control any piece of hardware we could want to
install directly inside the console, a switch to change clock speed for
instance. Or a logic gate that would disable basic GROMs: this way, if
you have a german GRAM-Karte, you can replace the console GROMs with
your own operating system.

#### Interrupt-driven keyboard

And what it we were to enable interrupts from the pins connected to the
keyboard? We would end up with an event-driven keyboard, just like on a
PC, right? Well, not quite. Remember, the keyboard is scanned one column
at a time, thus only the keys on the current column would trigger an
interrupt. Still, this is interesting since column 0 contains all
modifying keys: Shift, Ctrl and Fctn. Not to mention Enter and the
spacebar. If your program follows the "menu bar" standard and is
controlled by Fctn-0 to Fctn-9 and Ctrl-0 to Ctrl-9, then keyboard
scanning could be performed by an interrupt service routine.
 

       LI   1,&gt;FF00     Interrupt mask=1 for all of them 
       LDCR R1,8        Set mask
       LI   R12,&gt;0024   Select column 0 
       LDCR R12,3

Now we must hook the cassette ISR as [above](#Timer%20mode), since those
interrupts would equally be mistaken for peripheral interrupts. Once
this is done, your main program can simply scan the keyboard with:
`LIMI 2 LIMI 0.` Our ISR will call the keyboard scanning routine
(`BL @>000E`) and react to the key pressed by returning at various
places in our program.

I agree, we could do the same with:
 

       SETO R1 
       STCR R1,8       Read 8 pins 
       INV  R1         A pin reads as 0 if a key is pressed 
       JNE  KPRESS     A key was pressed, find which, react. 

But the "interrupt" way is more fun.

#### The Evil Grail?

Another more frightning thought: what if we were to program the keyboard
input pins as output? The TMS9901 data manual says that trying to force
data into an ouput pin could damage the chip. Does this mean that we
have reached the "Evil Grail" of every hacker: write a virus that
effectively damages the computer at the hardware level?

I don't think so, although I didn't dare to check. The input pins for
the keyboard row are pulled up via 10K resistors, thus the maximal
current they will sink if we set them as low output is 5V/10K= 0.5
mAmps. If we set them as high, their current will be drawn by the
74LS138 decoder via 470 Ohm resistors, thus here again the current will
be limited (assuming 4 Volts for a high pin, which is a lot): 4V/470=8.5
mAmps. And that's assuming the decoder has no current limitation of
itself. The TMS9901 data manual does not state what's the minimal
current that would cause damage to the chip, but we ought to be safe
with those values. Anyone willing to test? Just get yourself an extra
console and do:
 

       LI   R1,&gt;0100 
       LDCR R1,3        Select column 1`
       LI   R12,&gt;0038   Address of keyboard rows as output pins 
       CLR  1           Try to force them low (against pullup) 
       LDCR R1,4        As only 4 pins can be set as output 
       BL   @WAIT       Allow time for damage
       ...
       SETO R1          Now try to force them high 
       LDCR R1,4        Set output values to 1 
       ...              Now press a key (2,S,W or X) and hold it down

Next, reset the TI-99/4A and test the keyboard. Is it still ok??
(Please, let me know).

##   Timing diagrams

### Interrupts

    ______    _>225__    _______| 300-2000_|   ______ PHI
         r\__/f      \__/       \__/       \__/      
    __              45-300   ________________________ INTn*
      \>60|_________________/>60|                    
    _____________________                         ___ INTREQ*
                    |>110\__________________|<110/

    r: 5-40 ns
    f: 10-40 ns

###  CRU interface

    CRU write cycle                    CRU read cycle      
    ____                _________________                  
        \______________/                 \_________________ CE*
        |>100|______                     |   >300   |      
    _________/10-185\______________________________________ CRUCLK
        |>100|      |>60|                                  
    XXXX/ valid address \XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX/  valid address   S0-S4
                                         |   >320   |      
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX/ valid data    INTx/Px
                                            | >200  |      
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX/ valid CRUIN
        |>100|      |>60|                                   
    XXX/  valid data    \XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX CRUOUT

##    Electrical characteristics

### Absolute maximum ratings

    Supply voltage:                -0.3 to 10 V
    All inputs and output voltage: -0.3 to 10 V
    Continuous power dissipation:        0.85 W
    Free-air temperature:            0 to 70 `C
    Storage temperature:          -65 to 150 `C

###  Recommended operating conditions

|                          |       |     |      |      |
|--------------------------|-------|-----|------|------|
| Parameter                | Min   | Nom | Max  | Unit |
| Supply voltage, Vcc      | 4.75  | 5   | 5.25 | V    |
| Supply voltage, Vss      | \-    | 0   | \-   | V    |
| High-level input voltage | 2     | \-  | Vcc  | V    |
| Low-level input voltage  | Vss-3 | \-  | 0.8  | V    |
| Free-air temperature     | 0     | \-  | 70   | \`C  |

###  Electrical characteristics under recommended conditions


I = -200 uA
2.2
Vcc

     

Revision 1. 2/19/99. OK for release

Revision 2. 3/30/99. Polishing

Revision 3. 5/30/99. Tested and debugged examples

Revision 4. 9/1/99 In CRU map, VDP+peripheral ints were inverted!
Revision 5. 1/15/06 Added Jeff Brown's hack .
Revision 6. 1/20/06 Corrected bug: flag bit is at \>83FD, not \>83FC.

[Back to the TI-99/4A Tech Pages](titechpages.md)
