# TMS9919 Sound chip

[Pinout](#Pinout)
[Internal structure
](#Structure)[Timing diagram
](#Timing%20diagrams)[Electrical characteristics](#Electrical)

[Programming the sound generators](#Programming)
[Playing notes](#Notes)
[Direct sound](#Direct)

## Introduction

The TMS9919 sound chip contains three independent tone generators and a
noise generator that can emit either white noise (i.e. all frequency
have identical energy) or periodic noise. I don't have the data manual
for this chip, but I have one for the SN76489 and SN76496, very similar
chips manufactured by TI. The only difference I noted was that the
AUDIOIN pin is not connected on the SN76489AN. If anybody happens to
have a copy of the actual TMS9919 manual please [let me
know.](feedback.htm#Info)

## Pinout

             +----+--+----+
          D2 |1 o  T    16| Vcc
          D1 |2    M    15| CLK
          D0 |3    S    14| D3
       READY |4         13| D4
         WE* |5    9    12| D5
         CS* |6    9    11| D6
    AUDIOOUT |7    1    10| D7
         Vss |8    9     9| AUDIOIN
             +------------+

Power supply
**Vcc** +5V, (via a 6.8 uH inductor in the TI-99/4A)
**Vss** Ground
CPU interface
**D0-D7** These input pins accept commands from the CPU.

**CS\*** Chip select. When this pin is active (low) the TMS9919 will
input data from the data bus. For proper operation, the device should be
initialized by pulling both CS\* and WE\* high.

**WE\*** Write enable. When active (low) this pin signals a write
operation. As far as I know, all operations dealing with the TMS9919 are
write operations. I'm not aware that there is anything to read.
[Anyone](feedback.htm#questions)?

**READY** This pin goes low to put the CPU on hold until the TMS9919 is
ready: it takes approximately 32 CLOCK cycles for the chip to load data
into a register.

|      |      |       |
|------|------|-------|
| CS\* | WE\* | READY |
| L    | L    | L     |
| L    | H    | L     |
| H    | L    | H     |
| H    | H    | H     |
Sound pins
**CLK** Clock pin. Receives the basic clock signal used to generate
sounds. The acceptable frequency ranges from 0 to 4MHz. On the TI-99/4A,
this pin receives a 3.58 MHz signal from the VDP CPUCLK pin.

**AUDIOIN** This input pin receives preformed sound signals and
transmits them to the AUDIOOUT pin. It is an analog input. In the
TI-99/4A is is connected to pin \#44 of the side port via a 330 Ohm
resistor, for sound input from the speech synthesizer. It is also
connected in parallel to the cassette input port which allow us to ear
that funny noise when reading a program from tape. Finally, the TMS9901
also controls this line via a transistor, which could be used by
application programs to directly generate sounds via the CRU. This pin
is marked n.c. on the SN76489.

**AUDIOOUT** This pin carries the sound data to the monitor's speaker
(pin 3 of the connector). It is connected to an internal analog audio
amplifier.

 #7|--------+----||---+--uuu---+----&lt; pin 3 monitor port
   |        |  100uF  | ?uH    |
   |  0.1uF =    10nF =        = 10nF
   |        |         |        |
   |        +--www---Gnd      Gnd
--+ 10 Ohm

##  Internal structure

The signal received from the CLOCK pin is divided by 16 to provide the
internal signal frequency. This means that the CLOCK signal can be as
high as 4 MHz and yet produce audible sounds. Note that there exists a
chip, SN76494N, that is exactly similar to the SN76489 except that the
CLOCK signal is only divided by 2. It allows to use a clock signal in
the 500 kHz range.

The chip contains three tone generators and a noise generator. Each tone
generator consists in: a programmable frequency divider that divides the
CLOCK frequency by a user-definable value to generate the appropriate
tone, a fixed 1/2 frequency divider and a programmable attenuator that
allows to control the volume in increments of 2 dB.

The noise generator comprises: a fixed 1/16 divider, a programmable
divider (1/2, 1/4 or 1/8), a noise source and an attenuator identical to
that of the tone generators. The programmable divider can also accept
the output of tone generator number 3 as an input. The noise source is a
shift register with a XOR feed-back to prevent lockup in zero state. It
is possible to control this feedback circuit to toggle between a "white"
noise and a periodic noise. The shift register is cleared each time the
divider is loaded, then it shifts at the frequency determined by the
divider output.

The four signals are combined by an analog summer, whose output drives
an audio amplifier, typically with a current from 0 to -160 uA. The
audio output can generate upto 10 mA.

                   ,--| 1/N  |----| 1/2 |---|Attenuator|---,   +1.5V
          ______   |   ______      _____     __________    |     |  |\
CLOCK &gt;--| 1/16 |--+--| 1/N  |----| 1/2 |---|Attenuator|-, &#39;-|\  &#39;--|+\
                   |   ______      _____     __________  &#39;---| \    |  \_ _ AUDIOOUT
       ,-----------+--| 1/N  |----| 1/2 |-+-|Attenuator|-----|  \_ _|  / |
       |                  ,---------------&#39;                  |  / | |-/  |
       |   ______         |        _____     __________   ,--| /  | |/   |
       &#39;--| 1/16 |----| 1/n  |----|shift|---|Attenuator|--&#39;  |/   &#39;--WWW-&#39;
                                                           Summer    17K          

The four attenuators and the four programmable dividers can be accessed
from the data bus, as 8 dedicated registers. The tone dividers are
10-bit wide and thus require two bytes of data.

#### Tone frequency dividers
R0-R2: Register address (see below)
F0-F9: Number by which to divide the frequency (\>01-3F)

NB The register address is latched on-chip when the first byte is
passed. This means that the second byte can be sent repeatedly, as it is
identified by a 0 in the most significant bit. In this way, you can very
rapidly sweep frequencies, by changing only the 6 most significant bits
(F0-F5) with a single byte transfer.

####  Noise frequency divider

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| 1   | R0  | R1  | R2  | x   | FB  | F0  | F1  |

R0-R2: Register address (see below)
FB: Feed-back option 0 = periodic, 1 = white noise
F0-F1: Number by which to divide the frequency: 00 = 512, 01 = 1024, 10
= 2048, 11 = use generator \#3

####  Attenuators

|     |     |     |     |     |     |     |     |
|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
| 1   | R0  | R1  | R2  | A0  | A1  | A2  | A3  |

R0-R2: Register address (see below)
A0-A3: Attenuation. A0 = 16 dB, A1 = 8 dB, A2 = 4dB, A3 = 2 dB. 1111 =
sound off
The attenuation accuracy is quite poor: +/- 1 dB

####  Register address

|     |     |     |                          |
|-----|-----|-----|--------------------------|
| R0  | R1  | R2  | Register                 |
| 0   | 0   | 0   | Tone 1 frequency divider |
| 0   | 0   | 1   | Tone 1 attenuator        |
| 0   | 1   | 0   | Tone 2 frequency divider |
| 0   | 1   | 1   | Tone 2 attenuator        |
| 1   | 0   | 0   | Tone 3 frequency divider |
| 1   | 0   | 1   | Tone 3 attenuator        |
| 1   | 1   | 0   | Noise frequency divider  |
| 1   | 1   | 1   | Noise attenuator         |

##  Timing diagram

    ______               _________               _______
          \_____________/         \_____________/        CE*
    _____|_a_| 90-150 ns
         |   \___________/  >0     |  |a \        /      READY
         | >0   |                  |  |
                \_____________/    |  \_______     /     WE*
            |>0|                   |
           X     first byte       X   second byte    X   D0-D7

    a) 90-150 ns

##  Electrical characteristics

### Absolute maximum ratings

    Supply voltage: Vcc               7V
    Input voltage:  AUDIOIN         0.9V
                    All others        7V
    Output current on AUDIOOUT     10 mA
    Continuous power dissipation 1150 mW
    Free air temperature:     0 to 70 `C
    Storage temperature:   -55 to 150 `C

###   Recommended operating conditions

|                                   |     |     |     |      |
|-----------------------------------|-----|-----|-----|------|
| Parameter                         | Min | Nom | Max | Unit |
| Supply voltage, Vcc               | 4.5 | 5   | 5.5 | V    |
| High-level input voltage          | 2   | .   | .   | V    |
| Low-level input voltage           | .   | .   | 0.8 | V    |
| AUDIOIN input current             | 0   | .   | 1.8 | mA   |
| High-level output voltage (READY) | .   | .   | 5.5 | V    |
| Low-level output current (READY)  | .   | .   | 2   | mA   |
| Input clock frequency             | .   | .   | 4   | MHz  |
| Free-air temperature              | 0   | .   | 70  | \`C  |

###  Electrical characteristics under recommended conditions


D0-D7, WE*, CLK pins
-10
-70
(other generators -30 dB)

##  Programming the sound generators

The four generators (3 tone and 1 noise) can be accessed independently
by the data bus. The first byte of data contains the address of the
desired generator and the parameter to change (frequency or volume). In
some cases, a second byte of data may follow, that will be sent to the
same generator as the previous one. In the TI-99/4A the sound chip data
port is mapped at \>8400, but the address is incompletely decoded: only
A0-A5, A15 and MEMEN\* are taken into account. Thus, the chip will
respond to any even address in the range \>8400-\>85FE.

|           |           |        |
|-----------|-----------|--------|
| Generator | Frequency | Volume |
| Tone 1    | \>8z \>xy | \>9v   |
| Tone 2    | \>Az \>yx | \>Bv   |
| Tone 2    | \>Cz \>yx | \>Dv   |
| Noise     | \>En      | \>Fv   |

    Frequency = 111860.8 Hz              Volume v:  +1 = -2 dB (>F = off)
                   xyz

#### Tones

Two bytes are required to set the frequency of a tone generator. The
first nibble of the first byte contains the address of the generator
(\>8, \>A or \>C). The second nibble should be appended to the end of
the second byte to generate a 3-nibble number xyz. The output frequency
can be calculated by dividing 111,860.8Hz by xyz. The value 111,860.8 is
due to the fact that the 3.58 MHz clock signal is divided by 32 to
produce the base frequency used by the generators.

Once the first byte is passed, the second byte can be modified as often
as needed, as long as no other command is passed. This allows for rapid
frequency changes, as only one byte needs to be passed (although only
the 6 most-significant bits will be changed).

#### Noises

For the noise generator, only one byte is needed. The first nibble
should contain the address (\>E) and the second 3 command bits that
decide whether the generator will emit white noise or periodic noise
(bit 6) and select the basal frequency from a list of three. It is also
possible to instruct the noise generator to adopt the same frequency as
tone generator 3, even if the latter is currently silent (i.e. volume =
\>F).

    1 1 1 0 0 w r r
      >E      | | |
              | 0 0 : 6991 Hz
              | 0 1 : 3496 Hz
              | 1 0 : 1748 Hz
              | 1 1 : freq of generator 3
              |
              0 : Periodic noise
              1 : White noise

#### Volume

Strictly speaking, one does not set the volume for a generator, but
rather its attenuation. That is, higher values result in lower volumes.
Zero is the maximum volume, any increment by one reduces the volume by 2
dB (i.e. 100 times less sound energy), and \>F turns the generator
completely off.

###  Playing notes

Here is a table that you can use to program the frequencies of a
"well-tempered keyboard". Just replace the dot with the code of the
desired generator (\>8, \>A or \>C) and pass the result as two bytes at
\>8400.

############
############
############
############
############

Notes
The underlined .E0F corresponds to the middle A at 440 Hz. Note that
many orchestra nowadays tend to tune their middle A at a higher pitch:
at 441, 442 or even upto 444 Hz. I'll leave you with the task to correct
this table accordingly..

You may have noted that the calculated frequency follows a log scale,
dobbling from one column to another (taking rounding mistakes into
account). That's because of the way our ear is designed: octaves,
subjectively "equal" intervals of 12 half-tones correspond to a dobbling
of the frequency. This allow us to ear a wide range of frequencies.

One last remark: this table works well to emulate keyboard instruments
(piano, harpsichord, organ) that are "tempered", i.e. on which an A
sharp is the same as a B flat. This is not the case for other
instruments like the violin or the cello: on these the A sharp is a tad
(a "coma" in french, a "microtone" in english?) higher than the B flat.
Most people won't notice the difference, unless the same note is played
on a piano and a violin together: it gives the impression that the
violinist does not play in tune. He does! It's the piano that's wrong.

####  Examples

       LI   R0,&gt;8400     Sound port address on the TI-99/4A
       LI   R1,&gt;8E0F     Middle A on generator 1
       MOVB R1,*R0
       SWPB R1
       MOVB R1,*R0
       LI   R2,&gt;9200     Volume: 4 dB below maximum
       MOVB R2,*R0       Play it
       ...               Wait
 * Now let&#39;s make a noise (the note is still playing)
       LI   R1,&gt;DF00     Make sure generator 3 is off
       MOVB R1,*R0
       LI   R1,&gt;CC1A     C on generator 3
       MOVB R1,*R0
       SWPB R1
       MOVB R1,*R0
       LI   R1,&gt;E300     Periodic noise, picking frequency from gen 3
       MOVB R1,*R0
       LI   R1,&gt;F000     Volume: full blast
       ...               Wait
* Turn all sounds off
       LI   R1,&gt;9F00     Start with generator 1
LP1    MOVB R1,*R0       Turn it off
       AI   R1,&gt;2000     Next generator
       JNC  LP1          Carry set when &gt;EF becomes &gt;00
       B    *R11

This example is deceptively simple: programming music is a fairly
complicated task. First you must decide how to encode your music: do you
want a separate list for each generator or a common list?

Then you must time each note. A good way is to place a sound list in the
VDP memory and to let the [ISR play it](ints.htm#sounds), but according
to your needs you may want to do it yourself, for instance with the
TMS9901 timer. You must also remember that each note should be followed
by a small silence, unless you're playing *legato* (although to repeat a
note in *legato*, you still need a small silence). Conversely, to play
*staccato* or *pizzicatti* you must reduce the duration of a note and
increase the silence accordingly.

And then, there is the problem of the volume: progressive changes in
volume (*crescendo*, *decrescendo*) can be tricky to program as they
must be integrated into your sound list. Finally for some instruments to
sound natural, the sound of each note should be slowly fading over time.
That's the case with the piano for instance (but not with the flute: as
long as the musician is blowing steadily, the volume remains unchanged).

##   Direct sound

We can send sound directly to the speaker via the sound chip, without
using the generators. This is achieved with CRU bit 24 in the console:
it is normally used to control whether the input from a cassette tape
recorder will be audible, but thanks to a pull-up resistor it can also
be used to generate sound even if no recorder is installed.

* R1 contains a pointer to a list of sound bits
* R2 is the size of the list, in words
* R3 is the delay between two bits (i.e. depends on the sampling rate)
* In addition, the routine makes use of R4, R10 and R12.
BITSND MOV  R11,R10
       CLR  R12         CRU base of the TMS9901
LP2    MOV  *R1+,R4     Get one word from the list
       LI   R0,16       16 bits per word
LP1    SLA  R4,1        Test next bit
       JNC  SK1
       SBO  24          Send 1 to sound gate
       JMP  SK2
SK1    SBZ  24          Send 0 to sound gate
SK2    BL   @DELAY      Delay between two bits
       DEC  R0
       JNE  LP1         Next bit
       DEC  R2
       JNE  LP2         Next word
       B    *R10
 * Delay routine
DELAY MOV  R3,R12      Get delay value (in R12, to save a register)
LP3   DEC  R12
      JNE  LP3         Keep waiting
      B    *R11        R12 is now &gt;0000, which is the correct CRU value`
* NB: for short delays, we should account for the longer time between two
* words, due to the 4 extra instructions needed to load a new word.`
* Main program
START LI   R1,BUFFER   Buffer address
      LI   R2,&gt;0800    Buffer size
      LI   R3,&gt;AAAA    Test pattern: highest possible pitch (1010 1010)
L0    MOV  R3,*R1+     Fill buffer with test pattern
      DEC  R2
      JNE  L0`
      LI   R1,BUFFER   Buffer address
      LI   R2,&gt;0800    Buffer size
      LI   R3,&gt;0040    Delay value
      BL   @BITSND     Play buffer content
      ...              Return when done (this may take time)

Here, the tricky part is to determine the list of bits to be passed. I
wonder if PC .RAW files could be used?

Also, I don't think there is any way to control the volume. Any
[suggestions](feedback.htm#Info)?

####  SoundFX

A different method was used by Barry Boone in his excellent SoundFX
program. He sets the maximum frequency (\>001) on the three sound
generators and then modulates the volume (identically for all three).
Obviously, this implies carefully controlled timing loops so as to
generate the required frequency.

Barry made the SoundFX source available on his website, so I encourage
you to have a look at it. [Here](soundfx.txt) is an excerpt, containing
only the sound generation routines and the routines that translate other
sound files in SoundFX format..

Revision 1. 2/19/99. OK for release

Revision 2. 3/30/99. Polishing
Revision 3. 5/30/99. Tested & debugged examples
Revision 4. 6/16/00. Added SoundFX info

Revision 5. 7/2/00. Got the SN76489 manual. Added structure, timing,
electricals.
Revision 6. 7/12/00. Got the SN76494 manual. Changes electricals.
[Back to the TI-99/4A Tech Pages](titechpages.md)
