# TMS9900 Central Processing Unit

[Pinout](#Pinout)

**Execution speed**
[Calculations](#Speed)
[Examples](#Calculations)
[Optimizing for speed](#Optimizing)
[Speed test program](#Speed%20test)

**Instruction issues**
[External instructions](#External)
[XOP](#XOP)
[X](#X)
[C](#C)

[Timing diagrams](#Timing)
[Electrical characteristics](#Electrical)

## Introduction

The TMS9900 is the CPU, i.e. the brain of the TI-99/4A. This
microprocessor executes a machine language program located in memory and
controls all the other chips in the computer. It's a real 16 bits
microprocessor, which means it has 16 data lines and an address space of
2^^16 bytes, i.e. 64K. To accomodate all these lines, TI had to create
an extra-large 64-pins chip, that was quite a novelty by that time. They
could even afford the luxury of having 5 non-connected pins!

## Pinout

            +----+-----+----+ 
        Vbb |1 o          64| HOLD* 
        Vcc |2            63| MEMEN* 
       WAIT |3      T     62| READY 
      LOAD* |4      M     61| WE* 
      HOLDA |5      S     60| CRUCLK 
     RESET* |6            59| Vcc 
        IAQ |7      9     58| nc 
       PHI1 |8      9     57| nc 
       PHI2 |9      0     56| D15 
        A14 |10     0     55| D14 
        A13 |11           54| D13 
        A12 |12           53| D12 
        A11 |13           52| D11 
        A10 |14           51| D10
         A9 |15           50| D9 
         A8 |16           49| D8 
         A7 |17           48| D7 
         A6 |18           47| D6 
         A5 |19           46| D5 
         A4 |20           45| D4 
         A3 |21           44| D3 
         A2 |22           43| D2 
         A1 |23           42| D1 
         A0 |24           41| D0 
       PHI4 |25           40| Vss 
        Vss |26           39| nc 
        Vdd |27           38| nc 
       PHI3 |28           37| nc 
       DBIN |29           36| IC0 
     CRUOUT |30           35| IC1 
      CRUIN |31           34| IC2 
    INTREQ* |32           33| IC3 
            +---------------+

Power supply
**Vbb**: -5V Vcc: +5V Both pins (2 and 59) must be connected.
**Vdd**: +12V Vss: Ground. Both pins (26 and 40) must be connected.

Clock
**Phi1-Phi3** are 4 input pins that receive the same signal from the
TMS9904 clock generator, with one exception: each signal is shifted by
1/4 of a phase with respect the the previous one.

Data bus
**D0-D15:** These 16 pins are used to read or write data. Note that
contrarily to almost anybody else, TI made D0 the most significant bit
(weight \>8000) and D15 the least significant bit (weight \>0001).

Address bus
**A0-A14:** These 15 output pins are used the specify the address of
32Kwords in memory. Each word is two bytes long (since we have 16 data
lines), thus we are effectively addressing 64Kbytes. On the TI-99/4A,
the data bus is multiplexed as 2 x 8 bits for almost every purpose
except accessing the console ROMs and the scratch-pad RAM. The
multiplexing circuitery controls a pseudo-address line A15 that
indicated whether the 8-bit data bus contains the most significant byte
of the 16-bit bus (A15=0) ot the least significant byte (A15=1).

Bus control
**MEMEN\*** Memory enable. When active low, this pin indicated that the
TMS9900 wants to access memory and has placed a valid address on the
address bus.

**DBIN** Data bus in. When active (high) this pin indicates that the
TMS9900 is ready to accept data.

**WE\*** Write enable. When active (low) this pin indicates that the
TMS9900 has placed valid data on the bus.

CRU control
**CRUCLK** CRU clock. When active (high) this pin indicates the the
TMS9900 is performing a CRU operation (or an external instruction).

**CRUOUT** This output pin contains the data that the TMS9900 sends out
during CRU operations.

**CRUIN** This pin is used by the TMS9900 to input data during CRU
operations.

Interrupt control
**INTREQ\*** When active (low) this input pin signals the TMS9900 that
an interrupt is pending. If it accepts the interrupt, the TMS9900 will
perform `BLWP @>0000` through `BLWP @>003C` depending on the interrupt
level.

**IC0-IC3** These 4 input pins indicate the level of the interrupt
(0-15). The LIMI instruction can be used to define the "cutoff" level,
above which the TMS9900 will ignore interrupts. On the TI-99/4A those
pins are hardwired as low,low,low,high which means all interrupts are
level 1.

**LOAD\*** Non-maskable interrupt. When active low, this pin forces the
TMS9900 to perform a `BLWP @>FFFC` interrupt. If it remains low,
interrupts continue to be issued, thus is should not remain low for more
than one instruction.

**IAQ** Instruction acquisition. This output pin indicates that the
TMS9900 is acquiring an instruction. It can be used to detect illegal
opcodes or to prevent LOAD\* to last longer than one instruction. On the
TI-99/4A, IAQ and HOLDA are combined via an OR gate and presented to the
peripheral port. However, the flex cable connector does not carry that
signal to the PE-Box.

**RESET\*** When active (low) this input pin resets the TMS9900 and
inhibits WE\* and CRUCLK. RESET\* must remain low for at least 3 clock
cycles. As soon as it becomes high again, the TMS9900 performs a BLWP
@\>0000 (note that it is the same vector as interrupt level 0).

Memory control
**HOLD\*** When active (low) this pins tells the TMS9900 that a DMA
controller wants to perform Direct Memory Access. The TMS9900 set
D0-D15, A0-A14, MEMEN\*, DBIN and WE\* in high impedance state
(isolated) then activate HOLDA and waits until HOLD\* becomes high
again. On the TI-99/4A this pin is hardwired high, which means we cannot
perform DMA operations.

**HOLDA** Hold acknowledge. This output pin is used to tell the DMA
controller that the it can perform direct memory access.

**READY** When active (high) this input pin tells the TMS9900 that the
memory is ready to read or write data. If it's low, the TMS9900 enters a
wait state and suspends all operations until READY becomes high again.
On the TI-99/4A this line is used to multiplex the data bus, i.e. handle
it as two 8-bit bytes, instead of one 16-but word. WAIT When active
(high) this output pin indicates that the TMS9900 is now in wait state.

##  Execution speed

To execute an instruction, the TMS9900 must first fetch it from memory,
which takes a few clock cycles (depending on the memory), then is must
execute the instruction wich takes more clock cycles (depending on the
instruction) and may require fetching one or two arguments from the
memory (again, more clock cycles according to the addressing mode and
memory type).

On the TI-99/4A, there are two kinds of memory: 16-bit and 8-bit.
Console ROMs (address \>0000-1FFF) and the RAM scratch-pad (address
\>8300-83FF) are the only 16-bit memories. All the rest, including
peripheral cards, and memory-mapped devices (GROM, VDP, sound and speech
chips) are accessed in a byte-wise manner. This requires multiplexing
the 16-bit data bus in two 8-bits chunks. An electronic circuitery in
the console takes care ot that burden and uses the READY line to halt
the TMS9900 until the peripheral has received/sent the second data byte.
Therefore, accessing such a memory results in 4 wait states for each
memory access.

The table below can be used to calculate how long an instruction takes
to be executed.

The first column lists the instructions in alphabetical order.

The second column indicates how many clock cycles are required to
execute that instruction in its most primitive form (generally: using
workspace registers).

The third column indicates how many memory access operations are
required to fetch the instruction from the program memory and the
operands from their memory. In most cases, only one memory access is
needed to retrieve the instruction, except for immeidiate instructions
that need a second cycle to retrieve the immediate value embedded in the
program. If the program is in slow memory, it will take 4 more clock
cycles for each of these. All other memory accesses are used to read and
write the arguments. If the memory in question is not the console ROMs
nor the scratch-pad RAM, add 4 clock cycles per access operation.

The last two columns indicate whether the instruction required fetching
arguments. Some don't, some only need a source arguments, some need two
arguments (source and destination).

In case the arguments are not register, the instruction may require more
clock cycles and/or memory access than what's listed in column 2 and 3.
Table 2 allows to calculate the number of extra clock cycles required to
access arguments.
 

access

ABS(pos)
(neg)
DIV (ovf)
(no ovf)
Jump (taken)
(not taken)
Shift
(disp in R0)
STCR (1-7)
(8 bits)
(9-15 bits)
(16 bits)

Notes
1) DIV execution time, when no overflow occurs, depends on the partial
quotient after each clock cycle during execution.
2) For X, add this time to the execution time of the instruction found
at the source address, minus 4 clock cycles and 1 memory access.

For each source and destination arguments (if any) add the following:
 

cycles
access

*Rx+ (byte)
(word)

Note
For the \*Rx+ addressing mode, the number of clock cycles depends on
whether the register must be incremented by 1 or by 2. The byte-oriented
operations increment it by 1 and use 6 clock cycles, these are: AB, CB,
MOVB, SB, SOCB and SZCB. In addition, the LDCR and STCR are considered
as byte operations if they transfer 1 to 8 bits (with 9 to 16 bits they
are word operations and use 8 clock cycles).

###  Examples of calculations

**LIMI 2**
The LIMI instruction uses 16 clock cycles and 2 memory access
operations: one to fetch the LIMI instruction, one to fetch the
immediate value 2.

    Execution: 16 cycles
    1 mem access to read LIMI }
    1 mem access to read 2    } add 8 cycles if program is in slow mem.

This adds up to:
16 cycles if the instruction is in the ROMs or the scratch-pad,
16+2\*4=24 clock cycles otherwise (remember, there are 4 wait states per
memory access).

With a 3 MHz clock that cycles every 333 nanoseconds, this boils down to
16\*333 ns = 5.33 microseconds or 24\*333 ns = 8 microseconds, depending
on which memory the instruction is in. Tip: divide the number of clock
cycles by 3 to find the execution time in microseconds (with a 3 MHz
clock).

**CLR R2**
The CLR instruction uses 10 clock cycles and 3 memory access operations.
Depending on which memory it is in, it may require from 10 to 22 clock
cycles. But CLR also takes an argument that we must consider. In this
case, the argument is a register and the clock cycles needed for its
access can be found in table 1.

    Execution: 10 cycles
    1 mem access to read CLR: add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem.
    1 mem access to read R2   }
    1 mem access to write R2  } Add 8 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
**CLR @TEST**
The CLR instruction itself still uses 10 or 22 clock cycles to execute,
but now dealing with the argument requires 8 extra clock cycles and 1
extra memory access operations (to read the address of TEST from the
word following CLR in the program).

    Execution: 10 cycles
    Argument @xxx: 8 cycles
    1 mem access to read CLR   }
    1 mem access to read TEST  } Add 8 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read the contents of @TEST }
    1 mem access to write to @TEST             } Add 8 cycles if TEST is in slow mem

If the address TEST is not in the ROMs nor in the scratch-pad, it will
add 8+2\*4=16 clock cycles to the execution time. Otherwise it just adds
8 cycles. We thus have:

    10+8   = 18 cycles if program and TEST are both in fast memory.
    10+8+8 = 26 cycles if program in slow memory, but TEST is in fast memory.
    10+8+8 = 26 cycles if program is in fast memory, but TEST is in slow memory.
    10+8+8+8 = 34 cycles if both program and TEST are in slow memory.

**CLR \*R2**
Fetching the source argument from the address found in register R2
requires 4 clock cycles and 1 memory access operation. Depending whether
the workspace is in the scratch-pad or not (no workspace should ever be
in ROM!), this may require 4 additional clock cycles. Depending whether
the target address found in R2 (i.e. \*R2) is in slow or fast memory, we
may have to add 4 more cycles.

    Execution: 10 cycles
    Argument *Rx: 4 cycles
    1 mem access to read CLR: Add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read R2: Add 4 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read the contents of *R2 }
    1 mem access to write to *R2             } Add 8 cycles if R2 points to slow mem

So the total could be:

    10+4 = 14 cycles if CLR, workspace and *R2 are all in fast memory.
    10+4+4 = 18 if either CLR or the workspace is in slow memory.
    10+4+4+4 = 22 if both CLR and workspace are in slow memory
    10+4+8   = 22 if R2 points to slow memory
    10+4+8+4 = 26 if R2 points to slow memory and either CLR or WS is in slow memory
    10+4+8+4+4 = 30 if everything is in slow memory.
**LDCR R1,7**
The LDCR instruction itself requires 20 clock cycles. There may be
additonal cycles require to retrieve the instruction, or the register.
Writing the CRU definitely implies 2 additional clock cycles per bit
transfered: in this case we are transfering 7 bits, thus we'll eat
2\*7=14 cycles.

    Execution: 20 cycles
    1 mem access to read LDCR: Add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read R1: Add 4 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 cru write operation: Add 2 cycles per bit transfered (here: 2*7=14)

**LDCR \*R1+,7**
Now this one gets tricky: the LDCR instruction requires 20+2\*7=14 clock
cycles plus whatever may be needed for the memory access operations,
just as above. But now we must allocate time to increment R1 after
execution. Since we are transfering only one byte (that is, less than
one byte: only 7 bits), R1 will be incremented by 1, which requires 6
clock cycles and 2 memory accesses. Depending on where the workspace is,
this could add up to 6+2\*4=14 cycles.

    Execution: 20 cycles
    1 mem access to read LDCR: Add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read R1: Add 4 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read *R1: Add 4 cycles if source is in slow mem
    Incrementing R1: 6 cycles (byte operation)
    1 mem access to write back R1: Add 4 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 cru write operation: Add 2 cycles per bit transfered (here: 7*2=14)
**LDCR \*R1+,14**
Here, we are transfering 14 bits, thus the LCDR instruction takes
20+2\*14=48 cycles, plus what's needed for the memory access. In
addition, since we are transfering more that 1 byte, R1 will be
incremented by two, which requires 8 clock cycles instead of the 6
mentionned above.

    Execution: 20 cycles
    1 mem access to read LDCR: Add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read R1: Add 4 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read *R1: Add 4 cycles if source is in slow mem
    Incrementing R1 by two: 8 cycles (word operation)
    1 mem access to write R1: Add 4 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 cru write operation: Add 2 cycles per bit transfered (here: 14*2=28 cycles)

**SRL R2,4**
The SRL shift operation requires 12 clock cycles, plus 2 cycles for each
position shifted. Since the displacement is 4 in this example, it will
require 12+2\*4=20 cycles. Plus the number of cycles required for 3
memory access operations: 0 to12 depending on the position of the
program and the workspace.

    Execution: 12 cycles
    Shifting: 2 cycles per position
    1 mem access to read SRL: Add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read R2   }
    1 mem access to write R2  } Add 8 cycles if workspace is in slow mem

**SRL R2,0**
Here, we are fetching the displacement from R0 (let's say it contains
5). This indirect shift operation requires 20+2\*5=30 cycles, and 4
memory access operations instead of 3, as we must now fetch R0.

    Execution: 12 cycles
    Shifting: 2 cycles per position
    1 mem access to read SRL: Add 4 cycles if program is in slow mem
    1 mem access to read R2  }
    1 mem access to read R0  } Add 12 cycles if workspace is in slow mem
    1 mem access to write R2 }

These calculations are a pain to perform,
aren't they? I'm playing with the idea to write an optimisation helper,
i.e. a program that would read an assembly source file, and produce a
corresponding output file with the execution times listed as comments.
But I don't know when I will have time for that.
[Anyone](feedback.htm#questions) aware of such a program around here?

###  Optimizing for speed

Now we can see what are the cycle-hungry operations:
`DIV, MPY, LDCR, STCR, XOP` and `BLWP`.

That's why it is often wise to perform a multiplication using shifts and
additions rather than `MPY`:
Requires 72 cycles to execute (52 in 16-bits memory). And that's the
fastest `MPY`.

Now if R0 contains 8, we could have written:
Which does the same, but only uses 30 cycles (18 in fast memory).

To multiply by ten, we could do:

       MOV  R8,R9
       SLL  R8,2               And then by 4 (which makes 8)
       A    R9,R8              Add it up: 2+8=10.

This requires 58 cycles in fast memory and 114 in slow memory. True,
this is slower than the initial MPY, but we may have a use for the
intermediary result in R9 (that is, R8 times two).

For the same reason, many programers avoid calling subroutines with
`BLWP-RTWP` and favor `BL-B *R11`, at least in critical regions of their
programs.

We can't do much about `LDCR `and `STCR`, but this is less of a problem:
these instructions are rarely used anyhow, and the limiting factor may
well be the hardware they are addressing (although not very likely: TTLs
are fast).

###  Test program

All this theory is impressive, but we'd like to verify whether it is
true in the real word. Let's write a little test program and time its
execution with a stop watch (you may want to time it automatically, with
the TMS9901 [timer](tms9901.htm#Timer%20mode), but that's another
story).

       LI   R1,DELAY         The subroutine we want to time 
       LI   R2,&gt;B000         Where it will run       ** 2 **
       MOV  R2,R3 
       LI   R0,EOPG-DELAY    Subroutine size 
LP0    MOV  *R1+,*R2+        Copy subroutine in target memory 
       DECT R0 
       JNE  LP0
*      B    @RET             To return immediately   ** 3 ** 
       B    *R3              Call subroutine`
DELAY  LI   R1,100           You can change this value 
LP1    CLR  R0 
LP2    DEC  R0               Inside loop, executes 65536 times 
       JNE  LP2 
       DEC  R1               Outside loop 
       JNE  LP1`
RET    LWPI &gt;20BA            Assuming editor/assembler workspace 
       B   *R11              Done, return to editor/assembler module 
EOPG   END

The test program first copies the timed routine in memory. This could be
the scratch pad memory or the memory expansion. Then it executes the
delay loop. Once it is done, it returns to the caller. I have assumed
that this is the Editor/Assembler cartridge (oe Funnelweb). If it's not,
modify the return instrucutions accordingly.

Now let's do some measurements. First of all, assemble the program with
the `B @RET` in line \*\* 3 \*\*. The delay loops will be skipped and
the program will return immediately. This allows us to account for the
time it takes the Editor/Assembler module to enter our program, and to
display the \ message when returning from it. As you'll
see, this is so fast that we cannot time it..

Then let's comment out line \*\* 3 \*\* and time our program in four
different situations: Modify line \*\* 1 \*\* to use a workspace in the
memory expansion (\>A800) or in the scratch-pad (\>83E0). For each of
those, modify line \*\* 2 \*\* to copy the delay loop in the memory
expansion (\>B000) or in the scratch-pad (\>8300). Write the resulting
times in this table:
 

Worskpace

Of course, the faster way is to have both the program and the workspace
in the scratch-pad: in our case, it's twice as fast as the slowest
solution. Unfortunately, this is not practical as the scratch-pad is
only 256 bytes long. And many of those bytes have special meanings. Most
of the time however, it is possible for you to place your workspace in
the scratch-pad: `LWPI >8300` for instance. This will substantially
speed up your program (in our case, by 30%), especially if you are
carefull to reserve your registers for frequently used variables.

Now, if there are some speed-critical routines in your program (such a
scrolling the screen left/right in an arcade game), and if they are
small enough, you could copy them in the scratch-pad as we did above and
execute them there. Say at \>8320, not to overwrite your own workspace.

But anyhow, there is more to gain with the workspace than with the
program. Consider the instruction `A R1,R2` for instance: it requires
one memory operation to ftech the instruction from the program memory,
and three accesses to the workspace (to read R1, to read R2 and to write
back R2). So by placing the workspace in fast memory you gain three
times more than by plancing the instruction itself in fast memory.

To speed up the program itself, you could optimize your code to avoid
using those instructions that require a lot of time to execute, as
discussed above. And often an improved algorithm will do better than nay
optimization trick!

##  Instructions issues

It is not the purpose of these pages to teach assembly language. Thus I
won't discuss in detail the meanings of each and every instructions (see
my [assembly language primer](assembly.md)). However, there are a few
that are worth noticing.

### External instructions

There are five so-called external instructions: **`LREX `**(Load and
Restart EXecution), **`CKOF `**(clock off), **`CKON `**(clock on),
**`RSET `**(reset) and **`IDLE`**. The first four were used in the 990
microcomputer and have no special meaning on the TMS9900. They just
place a special code on address lines A0-A2 and send a pulse on the
CRUCLK pin. `RSET `also set the interrupt mask to zero, just like a
`LIMI 0`.

`IDLE `puts the TMS9900 in an idle state in which it remains until an
interrupt, a RESET\* or a LOAD\* signal occurs. During that time, the
processor repeatedly places the special code for `IDLE `on lines A0-A2
and pluses the CRUCLK pin.

The special codes are the following:
 

|                |     |     |     |          |
|----------------|-----|-----|-----|----------|
| Instruction    | A0  | A1  | A2  | A3-A14   |
| LREX           | H   | H   | H   | n/a      |
| CKOF           | H   | H   | L   | n/a      |
| CKON           | H   | L   | H   | n/a      |
| RSET           | L   | H   | H   | n/a      |
| IDLE           | L   | H   | L   | n/a      |
| CRU operations | L   | L   | L   | From R12 |

These instructions should not be used on the TI-99/4A because neither
the console nor any peripheral card I know of bothers with decoding
lines A0-A2 to distinguish a CRU operations from an external
instructions. In other words, the external instructions would be
mistaken for CRU operations and could cause havoc.

We could however make use of them if we were to make a slight
modification to the console: use a 74LS138 decoder to intercept the
CRUCLK line and let the signal through only if the CRU code is present
on lines A0-A2. The same decoder would activate five different lines,
one for each external instruction, that would allow us to trigger five
external devices.

A0-------|C     Y0*|-------|&gt;o---CRUCLK 
A1-------|B     Y1*| 
A2-------|A     Y2*|-----IDLE*
         |      Y3*|-----RSET* 
CRUCLK---|G1    Y4*| 
         |      Y5*|-----CKON* 
      +--|G2A*  Y6*|-----CKOF*
      +--|G2B*  Y7*|-----LREX*
      |  |         | 
      |  +---------+ 
     Gnd

Note that we'll also need an inverter to make CRUCLK active high after
the decoder. Very conveniently, there is a 74LS04 in the console with 3
non-connected inverters. It is located just above the TMS9900, right
were we need it.!

Why would we need such a circuit?
- We could use the `IDLE `instruction to enter an idle state and wait
for an interrupt.
- We could use a line (RSET\* jumps to mind) the send a reset signal the
the TMS9904 clock driver. This will perform a hardware reset
programmatically, as opposed to `BLWP @>0000` that only performs a
software reset (i.e. does not physically reset the peripheral chips).
- We could use the CKON\* and CKOF\* lines to switch the clock speed, by
feeding the appropriate signals to the TMS9904.
- More generally, we could use those line to activate any kind of
hardware we want.

For instance, I was told (by Anders Persson) that the "Cortex" computer,
which was sold as a kit in the 80s, made use of these instructions for
the following:
- RSET caused a hardware reset
- IDLE lit an external LED. The system would issues lots of IDLE when it
had nothing to do, so you could see that.
- CKON and CKOF enabled and disabled a memory mapper system, in the
style of the one used by the SuperAMS card.
- LREX triggered a delayed interrupt after two instructions (via a
series of flip-flops clocked by the IAQ line). This was used by a
debugger to execute single instructions, by setting up a pseudo-RTWP
pointing at a given instruction, and then doing LREX RTWP. The RTWP
would go back to the desired instruction, which was executed, and then
the interrupt would fire and the debugger was back in control. Nifty,
isn't it?

###  XOP instruction

The `XOP `(eXtended OPeration) instruction is kind of a special `BLWP`.
It takes a source argument and an operation number from 0 to 15. The
`XOP `instructions uses that number to perform a `BLWP `to one among 16
vectors located in memory addresses \>0040-007F. In addition, it places
the content of the source argument in the R11 register of the new
workspace. Finally, bit 6 (weight \>0200) is set in the status register
while a `XOP `instruction is executed. Note that the TMS9900 does not
test the INTREQ\* interrupt request pin after a `XOP `operation.

The main advantage of `XOP `is that it only requires one word.
Therefore, we could use it to replace any word in a program and
interrupt its execution. That's how my debugger RIP v.2 works: to set a
breakpoint is saves the content of a memory address and replaces it with
an `XOP 1`. Execution of this `XOP `results in activating RIP that can
then execute the saved instruction and/or ask the used what to do. True,
`BLWP *Rx` is only one word long, and so is `BLWP Rx`, but both expect
special values in the registers. The first one want a pointer to the WR
and PC vectors in Rx, the second want the WR vector in Rx and the PC
vector in the next register. `XOP `is much more convenient.

The drag is that all vectors for XOPs are in ROM memory, and only three
of them (two with some consoles) have usefull values. That's because the
GPL interpreter code begins right there. However, there are some eight
empty words at the end of the console ROM, TI could just have shifted up
the whole stuff and provide us with 4 more XOPs. Oh well, we can do with
the first three. Not to mention that some of the following vectors
happen to contain usefull values.
 



Now, any WR value that maps to the console ROM (below \>2000) is useless
as it will result in loosing the return address. I suspect that odd
workspace addresses may also cause havoc. The same is true for PC
values: we don't want to branch to ROM routines. Odd PC values have less
importance since the TMS9900 will ignore the least significant bit
anyway.

**XOP 0** is hardwired to switch on a peripheral card whose CRU base
address should be \>1B00, then enters its ROM at address \>4028, after
having changed the worskpace to \>2800. My guess is that this card was
meant to implement extra GPL opcodes, but I don't think it has ever been
released. Note that XOP 0 will not check whether the card is here or not
before branching. If there is no such card, the TI-99/4A will crash. Now
this is the ideal instruction to use to implement a debugger board...

**XOP 1** is extremely usefull for us. All we need to do is to place a
`B @MYPROG` at location \>FFF8 and XOP 1 will enter our program. Note
that this will preserve the LOAD interrupt vectors at locations
\>FFFC-FFFF.

**XOP2** Be carefull about XOP 2: some consoles do not support it... If
you decide to use it, you should probably place a `B @WHERE` instruction
right at \>8300 or soon after, since scratch-pad RAM is a precious
resource. Also, having our workspace at \>83A0 may disturb the data
stack of the GPL interpreter...

**XOP 6** The vectors are not guarantied to have these values on each
and every console...

**XOP 8, XOP 14, XOP 15** land in the middle of various routines in the
console ROMs. These routines expect a workspace of \>83E0 which won't be
the case. What happens then depends on the contents of the workspace in
use, of the \>83E0 workspace and possibly of other bytes in the
scratch-pad. It is not unconceivable that you can come up with a valid
combination that would do something usefull, but why bother?
 

Another (admitedly not so usefull) trick with the XOP instructions is to
use them to build a routine that can be called either with `BLWP `or
with `BL`. This relies on the fact that `XOP `opcodes have a value of
\>2Cxx, which can serve as a valid workspace. See, like this:

       DATA MYSB1              PC vector`
MYSB1  ...                     Do something 
       RTWP                    Return to caller (or to BLS)`
*--------------------------------------------------- 
* This routine transforms BL calls into BLWP calls 
*--------------------------------------------------- 
BLS    MOV  R13,@&gt;2C5A         Put user&#39;s workspace pointer in future R13 
       MOV  @22(R13),@&gt;2C5C    Put return address in future R14 
       MOV  R15,@&gt;2C5E         Put user&#39;s status in future R15 
       MOV  *R14+,@&gt;2C56       Get address from PC vector, in future R11 
       LWPI &gt;2C40              Change workspace 
       B    *R11               Branch to routine`
*--------------------------------------------------- 
* Set up XOP 1 
*--------------------------------------------------- 
       AORG &gt;FFF8 
       B    @BLS               Entered by XOP 1`
       END

If the procedure is called with` BLWP @MYSUB` it will treat the word at
MYSUB as a worskpace pointer (of value \>2C40) and begin execution of
the subroutine at MYSB1 with a workspace of \>2C40. Return to the caller
is performed by a plain vanilla `RTWP `

If it is called with `BL @MYSUB` it executes XOP 1 which immediately
branches to BLS with workspace \>FFD8. BLS is a routine that converts
`BLs `into `BLWPs`: it gets the PC vector from the data word following
the XOP 1 instruction (in this case MYSB1) and puts it in R11 of
workspace \>2C40 (that receives the source argument R0 upon XOP
execution). Then it copies the user's worskpace pointer and status
(saved by XOP 1) into R13 and R15 of workspace \>2C40. It gets the
return address from the R11 in the user's workspace and places it in R14
of workspace \>2C40. Finally it branches to the called subroutine, which
will never be aware of all the above: it can just assumed it was called
with `BLWP`, access parameters accordingly and return with `RTWP`.

That's a helluva slow way to call a subroutine, but it might be usefull
in cases...

###  X instruction

This instruction can be used to simulate another instruction: just place
the corresponding code in the source argument of the X (eXecute)
instruction.

Example: 

  X    R0

If the executed instruction has operands, they will be fetched from the
words following `X`, which somewhat limitates the usefullness of `X`. If
it were to fetch the operands from the words following the operand of
the `X `instruction, it would be a wonderfull way to write a debugger:
place a memory pointer in R1 and then do:` X *R1+ `Ok,ok it's not that
simple: we must trap the jumps and branches, and account for
instructions that use R1, but you get the idea. Unfortunately, that's
not the way `X `works...

Nevertheless, `X `may be usefull to replace a test in a frequently
executed loop. For instance:

       MOV  R5,R5        Performs some test 
       JEQ  SK1          Decide whether to clear or set to one 
       MOV  @SET,R2      Set to one`
SK1    LI   R0,&gt;2000     This loop is executed &gt;2000 times 
       LI   R1,BUFFER 
LP1    X    R2           Equals CLR *R1+ if R5 was null, SETO *R1+ otherwise 
       DEC  R0 
       JNE  LP1 
       ...`
CLEAR  CLR  *R1+        Simple alternative to calculating the values 
SET    SETO *R1+        of these instructions to put them in R2

We could have written:

       LI   R1,BUFFER 
LP1    MOV  R5,R5       Perform the test inside the loop 
       JEQ  SK1 
       SETO *R1+        Set 
       JMP  SK2 
SK1    CLR  *R1+        Clear 
SK2    DEC  R0 
       JNE  LP1 
       ...

But the first way is much faster, since we don't have to repeat the test
at each execution of the loop.

###  C instruction

Appart for comparison, this instruction can also be used to increment a
register by four:
This uses only one word of memory as opposed to the equivalent :

  INCT Rx

Note that the corresponding CB instruction would increment the register
by two, but there is no advantage over a plain vanilla `INCT `in this
case.

##   Timing diagrams

### Clock signals

The TMS9900 is meant to be fed a 3 MHz clock signal (that's right, 3 not
30) by the TMS9904 clock generator. This signal comes on 4 different
lines, each one being shifted by a quarter of a phase with respect to
the previous one. A graphical representation of these signals looks like
this:

     
       |____      333 ns         |____ 
    __/ 45  \___________________/     \______ Phi 1 
             _____                      _____ 
    ________/     \____________________/      Phi 2
       | 83  |      _____ 
    _______________/     \___________________ Phi 3
                  12     12_____ 
    ______________________/     \____________ Phi 4
                         5

The period of the clock, i.e the time between two pulses in a given
phase is 333 nanoseconds for a 3 Megaherz clock (a nanosecond is a
billionth of a second). Each pulse is high for about 45nanoseconds, with
a rising time of 12 ns and a falling time of 12 ns (note that my graph
is not drawn to scale).

Pulses in the next phase are 83 ns behind those in the first phase and
there is a 5 ns lag time between the end of one pulse and the start of
the corresponding pulse on the next phase. At least, that's what the
data manual says, but if you add up durations: 12+45+12+5 you get 74 ns,
not 83 ns! So were are the missing 9 nanoseconds? Your guess is mine...

Note that it is possible to crank up clock speed, upto 4 Mhz at least,
without risking to fry the TMS9900. Such modifications the the TI-99/4A
have been described (including in those pages), and are known to work.
Of course any process that relies on execution speed to time an external
device (such as disk access) will be messed up...

###  Internal memory bus timing

Below are some timing diagrams for the memory bus of the TMS9900. Note
that these will be different in the PE-Box, due to the multiplexing of
the data bus.

#### Read cycle (no wait state)

      _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____ Phi 1
        _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    ___| |_____|a|_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |___ Phi 2 
          _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_ Phi 3 
            _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _______| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____|  Phi 4 
    ____________                 ____________________________
                \_______________/                             MEMEN*
                 _______________ 
    ____________/               \____________________________ DBIN
                d              d 
    _________________________________________________________ WE* 

    XXXXXXXXXXXX/ Valid address \XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX A0-A14 

                    ______ 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX/ ^b   \XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX READY
                   e      e
    _________________________________________________________ WAIT
     
    CPU driven  | Input mode |r| Input ^c  | CPU driven       D0-D15 
                 ________________ 
    ____________/ if instruction \___________________________ IAQ

Notes
a) The cycle begins and ends on the rising edge of Phi 2 pulses.
b) Inputs should be ready at least 30 ns before the rising edge of the
next Phi 1 pulse.
c) Inputs should remain valid for at least 10 ns after the falling edge
of the Phi 1 pulse.
d) Propagation delays are at most 30 ns for MEMEN\*, DBIN, WE\* and
WAIT.
e) Propagation delays for all other outputs are at most 40 ns.
r) Read data

####  Write cycle (1 wait state)

      _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____ Phi 1 
        _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    ___| |_____|a|_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |___ Phi 2 
          _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_ Phi 3 
            _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _______| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____|  Phi 4 
    ____________                         ____________________ 
                \_______________________/                     MEMEN*
     
    _________________________________________________________ DBIN 
    ___________________              ________________________ 
                       \____________/                         WE*
     
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXX/  Valid  address     \XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX A0-A14 
                            ___ 
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX\^b___/ d^\XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX READY 
                           _______ 
    ______________________/c      \__________________________ WAIT
     
    CPU driven | CPU write data | CPU driven D0-D15 
    _________________________________________________________ IAQ

Notes
a) The cycle begins with the rising edge of Phi2.
b) The READY line is tested on the rising edge of the next Phi 1. It
should be high at least 40 ns before that time..
c) If it's low, the TMS9900 enters a wait state and
d) retest the READY line at each Phi 1 pulse, until it is high again.

####   CRU output (2 bits)

      _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____ Phi 1
        _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    ___| |_____|a|_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |___ Phi 2 
          _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_ Phi 3 
            _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _______| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____|  Phi 4

    XXXXXXXXXXXX/ Bit 1 address | Bit 2 address \XXXXXXXXXXXX A0-A14 
                        ___             ___ 
    ___________________|b  |___________|c  |_________________ CRUCLK
                       d   d           d   d
    XXXXXXXXXXXX/ Bit 1 value   | Bit 2 value   \XXXXXXXXXXXX CRUOUT
     
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX CRUIN

Notes
a) The cycle begins on the rising edge of a Phi 2 pulse.
b) A CRUCLK pulse is issued at the next Phi 2 pulse, until the end of
the Phi 3 pulse.
c) A similar CRUCLK pulses is issued for each following bit.
d) Propagation delays are at most 30 ns for CRUCLK (40 ns for other
outputs).

####  CRU input (2 bits)

      _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____ Phi 1 
        _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    ___| |_____|a|_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |___ Phi 2 
          _       _       _       _       _       _       _ 
    _____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_ Phi 3 
            _       _       _       _       _       _      _ 
    _______| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____| |_____|  Phi 4

    XXXXXXXXXXXX/ Bit 1 address | Bit 2 address \XXXXXXXXXXXX A0-A14
     
    _________________________________________________________ CRUCLK
     
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX CRUOUT 
                            ____            ____
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX/ ^b \XXXXXXXXXX/ ^c \XXXXXXXXXXXX CRUIN

Notes
a) The cycle begins on the rising edge of a Phi 2 pulse.
b) The CRUIN line is sampled at the rising edge of the second Phi 1
pulse following the Phi 2 pulse.
c) Following bits are sampled on the rising edge of every second Phi 1
pulse.
d) No CRUCLK is generated during CRU input.

##  Electrical characteristics

### Recommended operating conditions

|                      |        |      |       |        |
|----------------------|--------|------|-------|--------|
| Parameter            | Min    | Nom  | Max   | Unit   |
| Vbb                  | 5.25   | -5   | -4.75 | Volts  |
| Vcc                  | 4.75   | 5    | 5.25  | Volts  |
| Vdd                  | 11.4   | 12   | 12.6  | Volts  |
| Vss                  | \-     | 0    | \-    | Volts  |
| High level input     | 2.2    | 2.4  | Vcc+1 | Volts  |
| Ditto for clock      | Vdd-2  | \-   | Vdd   | Volts  |
| Low level input      | -1.0   | 0.4  | 0.8   | Volts  |
| Ditto for clocks     | -0.3   | 0.3  | 0.6   | Volts  |
| Free-air temperature | 0      | 25   | 70    | \`C    |

### Electrical characteristics under recommended conditions


Low level output voltage 

Revision 1. 3/25/99 Preliminary, but ok to release
Revision 2. 5/31/99 Tested & debugged examples
Revision 3. 1/4/02 Modified speed calculation examples
Revision 4. 1/15/06 Added example of external instruction use (Cortex
computer)
[Back to the TI-99/4A Tech Pages](titechpages.md)
