# Video Display Processor

## Introduction

The videoprocessor use in the TI-99/4A comes in three flavors, that
differ uniquely by the kind of output signal they send to the monitor
port.

The TMS9918A issues a 525-lines, NTSC signal for US television format.
The TMS9928A issues a 525-line signal, in the form of a B&W
luminance/sync signal and two color differential signals. This is meant
to drive a RGB monitor, with a minimal external circuitery.
The TMS9929A issues a 625-line signal, in the same format as the 9928A.
It is meant for use with the european PAL system.

Whatever its type, the VDP has four display modes: Bitmap (aka Graphic
II), Standard (aka Graphic I), Multicolor and Text mode. All modes
handle a 256x192 pixels screen in 16 colors except for text mode that
handles a 240x192 pixel screen in 2 colors.

The VDP has its own, dedicated memory, that could 4K, 8K or 16K (in the
TI-99/4A it's 16K). This memory can be accessed by the CPU, but only
through the VDP. The CPU displays objects on screen by placing the
appropriate values in the VDP memory.

The VDP contains 8 write-only registers that contains control bits or
the memory address of tables used to generate the screen image. It also
has a status register that can be read by the CPU.

[Pinout](#Pinout)
[VDP registers](#Registers)

**Video modes  **
[Standard mode](#Videomodes)
[Text mode](#Textmode)
[Multicolor mode](#Multicolor)
[Bitmap mode](#Bitmap)
[\_\_Hybrid modes
](#hybrid%20bitmap)[Bitmap text mode
](#Bitmap%20text)[Bitmap multicolor mode
](#Bitmap%20multicolor)[Illegal modes
](#Illegal%20modes)[Sprites](#Sprites)

**RAM interface  **
[Wiring](#RAM%20inteface)
[Address derivation](#Derivation)

**CPU interface  **
[Access ports](#CPUinterface)
[Timing issues](#CPUtiming)
[Programming examples](#CPUexamples)

**Monitor interface  **
[Monitor plug
](#Monitor%20plug)[Colors and gray levels](#Colors)
[Synchronisation signals](#Sync)

**Timing diagrams  **
[CPU interface](#Time%20cpu)
[VDP RAM interface](#Time%20VRAM)
[Clock interface](#Time%20clock)
[Monitor interface, TMS9918A
](#Time%20monitor%209918A)[Monitor interface,
TMS9928A/9929A](#Time%20monitor%209928/9A)

[Electrical characteristics](#Electrical)

## Pinout

           +----+--+----+
      RAS* |1 o       40| XTAL2
      CAS* |2         39| XTAL1
       AD7 |3    T    38| CPUCLK        R-Y  on TMS9928A/TMS9929A
       AD6 |4    M    37| GROMCLK
       AD5 |5    S    36| COMVID        Y    on TMS9928A/TMS9929A
       AD4 |6         35| EXTVDP        B-Y  on TMS9928A/TMS9929A
       AD3 |7    9    34| RESET*/SYNC
       AD2 |8    9    33| Vcc
       AD1 |9    1    32| RD0
       AD0 |10   8    31| RD1
      R/W* |11   A    30| RD2
       Vss |12        29| RD3
      MODE |13        28| RD4
      CSW* |14        27| RD5
      CSR* |15        26| RD6
      INT* |16        25| RD7
       CD7 |17        24| CD0
       CD6 |18        23| CD1
       CD5 |19        22| CD2
       CD4 |20        21| CD3
           +------------+

Power supply
**Vcc**: +5 Volts
**Vss**: Ground

Note: The console power lines +12V, +5V, and -5V are further
filtered before being applied to the VDP, RAMs and video circuitery.
Possibly to avoid RF interference with the rest of the chips on the
motherboard. In addition, the Vcc, Vdd and Vbb pins of each RAM chip are
grounded via a dedicated 0.1 nF capacitor. See the oscillator schematic
for the by-pass capacitors of the VDP.

+12V----+---UUU---+-------&gt; +12V video
        |         |
  10 nF =         = 22 uF
        |         |
       Gnd       Gnd`
           6.8 uH
+5V --------UUU---+-------&gt; +5V video
                  |
                  = 22 uF
                  |
                 Gnd`
           6.8 uH
-5V ----+---UUU---+-------&gt; -5V video
        |         |
  10 nF =         = 22 uF
        |         |
       Gnd       Gnd

CPU interface
**CD0-CD7**: Cpu data bus. CDO is the most significant bit and is
connected to D0 TMS9900 data bus.
**MODE**: CPU interface mode selection. In the TI-99/4A this pin is
driven by the A14 address line (weight \>0002).
**CSR\***: CPU read strobe. The CPU sets this input pin low to read from
the VDP. In the TI-99/4A this occurs when accessing even adresses in the
range \>8800-8BFE.
**CSW\***: CPU write strobe. The CPU sets this input pin low to write to
the VDP. In the Ti-99/4A this occurs when writing to even addresses in
the range \>8C00-8FFE.
**INT\***: CPU interrupt output. The VDP uses this output pin to send an
interrupt signal to the CPU. If enabled, interrupts are send each time a
frame is completed, while the beam is tracing up to the upper left
corner of the screen. This occurs about every 1/50th of a second for the
TMS9929A and 1/60th of a second for the TMS9918A and TMS9928A. In the
TI-99/4A the interrupt is received by the TMS9901 programmable interface
system, pin \#18 (INT2\*).

Memory interface
**AD0-AD7**: Address/data bus. AD0 is the most significant bit and
is connected to DIN on the TMS4116 RAM chip. AD7 is the least
significant bit and is connected to A0 on the TMS4116 RAM chip.
**RD0-RD7**: Read data bus. Each one of these input pins is connected to
the DOUT pins of a TMS4116 RAM chip.
**R/W\***: RAM write strobe. Output pin used by the VDP to indicate read
(high) or write (low) memory operations.
**CAS\***: RAM column address strobe. Output pin used by the VDP to set
the memory column address.
**RAS\***: RAM rwo address strobe. Output pin used by the VDP to set the
memory row address.

Video interface
**COMVID**: Composite video output. Connected to pin 4 of the
monitor port via a complicated amplification circuitery. On the TMS9928A
and TMS9929A this pin is the **Y** signal (black&white luminance and
composite sync).
**EXTVID**: External video input (to combine a signal from another VDP).
Connected to pin 5 of the monitor port and grounded via a 560 ohms
resistor. On the TMS9928A and TMS9929A this pin is the **B-Y** color
difference output.
**CPUCLK**: VDP color burst frequency clock.Connected to pin 2 of the
monitor port and grounded via a 560 ohms resistor. This signal is also
fed to the TMS9919 sound chip (pin 14, CLK) and to the GROMs (pin 13,
GRCLK) via a jumper. On the TMS9928A and TMS9929A this pin is the
**R-Y** color difference output.
**RESET\*/SYNC**: This trilevel input pin serves both as a reset signal
(when below 0.8V for at least 3 usec) and as a synchronizing input for
external video (when above 9V). In the TI-99/4A it is connected to the
RESET\* output of the TMS9904 clock driver and thus used uniquely as a
reset signal. Note that the VDP RAM is not refresh while this line is
active and may thus loose data.

Clock interface
**XTAL1-2**: Connections for an external 10.738635 MHz crystal.
**GROMCLK**: VDP output clock. This output pin carries a signal that
correspods to XTAL/24. It is pulled up to +5V with a 1K resistor and
connected to the GROMs (pin 13, GRCLK) via a jumper. According to the
VPD used, it is thus possible to select either CPUCLK or GROMCLK as a
clock signal for GROMs.

In the TI-99/4A the following circuit is used:

  ,----------------------+      |    VDP   |
  |                      |      |          |
  |  +5V--+---UUU---+----+------|Vcc       |
  |       |  5.8 uH |    |      |          |
  |   10pF=    100nF= 1pF=      |          |
  |       |         |    |      |          |
  |  Gnd--+---------+----+------|Vss       |
  |        S.R.                 |          |
  &#39;--WWW---UUU---+---+---+------|XTAL1     |
   470 Ohm       |   |   |      |          |
            56 uF=  ===  E      |          |
                 |   |   E 470K |          |
                Gnd  3   E      |          |
                     3   |      |          |
           2-&gt;4.5 uH 3   |      |          |
                     |   |      |          |
                     +---+------|XTAL2     |
                     |          |          |
               12 pF =          +----------+
                     |
                    Gnd

It would also be possible to use an external oscillator, driving two TTL
inverters as follow:

  |Osc|                   |         |          |
  |   |---|&gt;o---+---------+---------|XTAL1     |
  +---+         |                   |          |
                &#39;---|&gt;o---+---------|XTAL2     |
                          |         |          |
              +5V---www---+         |          |
                                    |          |
                                    +----------+

##  VDP registers

The first eight registers are used by the CPU to control the VDP. Very
unfortunately, these are write-only registers, which means there is no
way to determine the current display mode, unless it has been saved
somewhere in RAM by the program that set it. Registers 0 and 1 contains
control bits, registers 2 to 6 contains pointers to various tables in
the VDP RAM and register 7 encodes 2 colors.

The VDP also contains a read-only status register that is uses to pass
various information to the CPU.

VDP register 0
This register contains two control bits. All other bits must be
zero. The register contains \>00 after a reset.
**Bit 6** (weight \>02) selects a bitmap graphics mode when set to 1.
VDP register 1 determines which bitmap mode is used.
**Bit 7** (weight \>01) enables external video input when set to 1.

VDP register 1
This register contains 7 control bits. All are set as 0 after a
reset.
**Bit 0** (weight \>80) selects the memory size. For 4K of memory the
bit is 0, for 16K it is 1.
**Bit 1** (weight \>40) enables the screen. When this bit is 0 the
screen is blank.
**Bit 2** (weight \>20) enables interrupts. When this bit is 1, the VDP
issues interrupt signals on the INT\* pin each time it resumes
refreshing the screen (vertical retrace signal).
**Bit 3** (weight \>10) selects text mode when set as 1. Bit 7 of
register 0 can be set for bitmap text mode.
**Bit 4** (weight \>08) selects multicolor mode when set as 1. Bit 7 of
register 0 can be set for bitmap multicolor mode.
If both bits 3 and 4 are 0, the display is in standard mode (or in
bitmap mode, depending on register 0). Bits 3 and 4 should never be set
together.
**Bit 5** (weight \>04) is reserved and should be 0.
**Bit 6** (weight \>02) selects the sprite size. When 0, sprites are 8x8
pixels. When 1, sprites are 16x16 pixels.
**Bit 7** (weight \>01) selects sprite magnification. When this bit is
1, each sprite pixel is replaced by a 2x2 pixels box.

VDP register 2
Defines the location of the screen image table. Only the last 4 bits
are used, thus possible values for this register are \>00 throught \>0F.
The value is multiplied by \>400 to find the location of the screen
image table in the VDP memory. This table contains 1 byte for each
character position on the screen (left to right, downwards), this byte
contains the character number.

VDP register 3
Defines the location of the color table. Possible values are \>00
through \>FF and are multiplied by \>40 to find the location of the
color table. The table is not used in text mode, nor in multicolor mode.

In bitmap mode (i.e. when bit 6 in
register 0 is set) the meaning of this register changes: bit 0 (weight
\>80) is the only one used to determine the address of the color table,
which means the table has only two possible locations: \>0000 or \>2000.
The remaining bits are used to define the table size, by the way of an
address mask. This is done as follows: the righmost 7 bits are shifted
left by 6 positions, filling the rightmost bits with 1s. The result will
be a number between \>003F and \>1FFF, which is ANDed with the address
of a character in the table. As a result, the table can have any size
between \>40 and \>2000 bytes (however, note that the maximal usable
size is \>1800: 3 times \>800 bytes).

VDP register 4
Defines the location of the character pattern table. Only the last 3
bits are used, thus possible values are \>00 through \>07. The value is
multiplied by \>800 to find the location of the character pattern table.
Each entry in the table is eight bytes long and define the pattern of a
character, in numeric order. Each byte in an entry defines one line of
pixels in the character pattern: bits set as 1 result in foreground
color pixels, bits set as 0 encode background color pixels.

In text mode (i.e. when bit 3 in register 1 is set) the last two bits of
each byte are ignored since characters are only 6-pixel wide.

In bitmap mode (i.e. when bit 6 in register 0 is set) the structure of
this register changes: bit 5 (weight \>04) is the only one used to
determine the address of the color table, which means the table has only
two possible locations: \>0000 or \>2000. The two rightmost bits are
used to determine the length of the table, by the way of an address
mask. This is done by shifting them 11 positions to the left, filling
the righmost bits with 1s. The result will be a number between \>07FF
and \>1FFF that will be used as an address mask. At least, this is what
happens in bitmap + text mode (i.e. when bit 3 of register 1 is set). In
standard bitmap mode, the righmost bits are not necessarily 1: they are
taken from VDP register 3, i.e. the address mask of the color table is
used for both the color table and the pattern table addressing.

VDP register 5
Defines the location of the sprite attributes table. Only the last 7
bits are used, thus possible values are \>00 through \>7F. The value is
multiplied by \>80 to find the location of the sprite attributes table.
Each entry in the table is four bytes long and defines a sprite position
and color, in numerical order of sprites. See the chapter on
[sprites](#Sprites) for a detailed description of this table.

VDP register 6
Defines the location of the sprite pattern table. Only the last 3
bits are used, thus possible values are \>00 through \>07. The value is
multiplied by \>800 to find the location of the sprite pattern table.
Each entry in the table is eight bytes long and defines the pattern of a
sprite, one byte per line. Bits that are set as 1 result on a pixel of
the color defined for that sprite in the sprite attributes table, bits
that are 0 result in a transparent pixel. If the large sprite size is
selected (bit 6 in register 1 is set as 1) each entry is 32 bytes long
and define a sprite as a set of 4 characters arranged as:
1 3
2 4

VDP register 7
The first nibble of this register defines the color of all
characters in text mode. It is not used in the other modes.
The second nibble defines the background color wich is used for all
characters in text mode. In all four modes it defines the color of the
backdrop plane: this is the color of the screen outside the display area
and the color that appears under transparents characters. When this
color is set as transparent the external video image appears if it is
enabled, black color appears otherwise.

Status register
The first 3 bits of this register are automatically reset as 0 when
the register is read or when the VDP is reset. It ensues that the status
register should only be read when an interrupt is pending, otherwise an
interrupt could be missed.

**Bit 0** (weight \>80). This bit is set to 1 at the end of the raster
scan of the last line of the display area (i.e. before drawing the
bottom margin). If interrupts are enabled (by bit 2 in VDP register 1),
the INT\* pin is low when this bit is 1 and high when it's 0. This is
why the status register should be read after each frame, in order to
clear the interrupt and be ready to receive the interrupt at the end of
the next frame. Also, if bit 2 in VR1 is cleared and set again while
status bit 0 is set, an interrupt is issued immediately.
**Bit 1** (weight \>40) signals that there are 5 or more sprites on a
given pixel row. Only the topmost four will be displayed.
**Bit 1** (weight \>20) is the coincidence bit. It is set when two
sprites or more have at least one overlapping "on" pixel. This occurs
even if the sprite color is transparent. Note that coincidence is
checked only every 1/60th of second (1/50th of a second for the
TMS9929A), thus if you change sprite positions during that time a
coincidence could be missed.
**Bits 3 to 7** contain the number of the 5th sprite on a pixel line, if
any. This number is only meaningfull if bit 2 is set as 1 (else it may
contain the number of the last displayed sprite, but no guaranty). If
such a situation occurs more than once, the 5th sprite listed is the one
closest to the top of the screen.
Summary of the VDP registers contents

Weight:
&gt;80
&gt;40
&gt;20
&gt;10
&gt;08
&gt;04
&gt;02
&gt;01

Screen image
VR3
bitmap
Color table
Address mask
VR4
bitmap
Char pattern table
Address mask
Sprite attributs table
Sprites pattern table
Text color (in text mode)
Backdrop color
5th sprite number

##  Video modes

### Standard mode (Graphic I)

This mode is selected by setting all mode bits as 0: bit 7 in register 0
and bits 3 and 4 in register 1. VR0: **0** VR1: **0 0**

In this mode, the screen is divided into 24 rows of 32 characters. Each
character is 8x8 pixels and has two colors: one for the "on" pixels
(foreground color), one for the "off" pixels (background color). If a
color is set as 0, the color of the backplane will be used (defined by
register 7).

The screen image table is thus \>300 bytes long (24x32=768). Each byte
in the table contains the number of the character to display at the
corresponding position on screen. This number is used to locate the
character pattern in the pattern table and to look up its colors in the
color table.

The color table is 32 bytes long. Each byte encodes the two colors for a
group of 8 consecutive characters in numeric order (i.e. the first byte
affects characters 0-7, the second characters 8-15, etc). In each byte,
the first nibble encodes the foreground color, the second nibble the
background color.

The character pattern table contains 256 entries, one per character in
numeric order. Each entry is eight bytes long, each byte defines the
pattern of one pixel row in the character: "1" bits set the pixel to the
foreground color used for this character group, "0" bits set the pixel
to the background color of this character group.

     --------
    |        |  00000000 = >00
    |  ***   |  00111000 = >38
    | *   *  |  01000100 = >42
    | *   *  |  01000100 = >42
    |  ***   |  00111000 = >38
    |   *    |  00010000 = >10
    |  ***   |  00111000 = >38
    |   *    |  00010000 = >10
     --------

The pattern table entry for the above character would be: \>00 38 42 42
38 10 38 10

Sprites can be used in standard mode, see [below](#Sprites).

###  Text mode

This mode is selected by setting bit 3 of VDP register 1 as 1. Bit 4
must be 0, as well as bit 7 of register 0. VR0: **0** VR1: **1 0**

In this mode, the screen is devided into 24 rows of 40 characters. Each
character is made of 8 rows of 6 pixels. All characters have the same
two colors, defined by VDP register 7.

The screen image table is \>3C0 bytes long (24x40=960).Each byte in the
table contains the number of the character to display at the
corresponding position on screen. This number is used to fetch the
character pattern from the pattern table.

The color table is not used. The foreground color for each character is
taken from the first nibble of VDP register 7, the background color is
transparent, which lets the backdrop plane color appears. As the
backdrop color is encoded by the second nibble of VDP register 7, one
can consider that this register specifies both the foreground and
background colors for each character.

The pattern table is organized just as in standard mode, except that the
last two bits of each byte are ignored since characters are only
6-pixels wide in text mode.

     ------
    |      |  000000xx = >00
    |  *** |  001110xx = >38
    | *   *|  010001xx = >42
    | *   *|  010001xx = >42
    |  *** |  001110xx = >38
    |   *  |  000100xx = >10
    |  *** |  001110xx = >38
    |   *  |  000100xx = >10
     ------

Sprites are not available in text mode.

All this makes text mode the least memory-hungry mode: only a maximum of
3008 bytes (\>0BC0) of VDP RAM is required in this mode. This can be
further reduced by not using all 256 characters and/or by partly
overlapping the tables.

###  Multicolor mode

This mode is selected by setting bit 4 of VDP register 1 as 1. Bit 3
must be 0, as well as bit 7 of register 0. VR0: **0** VR1: **0 1**

In this mode, the screen is divided into 48 rows of 64 boxes. Each box
is 4x4 pixel and can be independently assigned a color. The screen image
table is still \>300 bytes long, but each byte now represent a
"character" made of 4 boxes. The boxes are arranged as:
0 1
2 3

The color of the boxes are defined in the character pattern table (!).
Each entry in the table is 8 bytes long but only 2 bytes are used to
define the colors of the 4 boxes that make up a character: \>01 \>23. To
avoid wasting 6 bytes in each entries, the characters on 4 consecutive
rows use the same entry, with an offset of 2 bytes:
characters on row 0, 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20 use bytes 0 and 1,
characters on row 1, 5, 9, 13, 17 and 21 used bytes 2 and 3,
characters on row 2, 6, 10, 14, 18 and 22 used bytes 4 and 5,
characters on rows 3, 7, 11, 15, 19 and 23 use bytes 6 and 7.

This reduces the size of this table to 1536 bytes (24 rows x 32 columns
x 8 bytes).

The color table is not used in multicolor mode.

Sprites can be used in this mode.

To summarize, the screen organisation is the following:

    Column:  0     1   ...   31

    Row 0:  a b   q r  ...
            c d   s t
    Row 1:  e f   u v
            g h   w x
    Row 2:  i j   y z
            k l   ...
    Row 3:  m n
            o p

The corresponding screen image table could be:

    Column:  0     1   ...   31

    Row 0:  >00  >01   ...  >1F

    Row 1:  >00  >01        >1F

    Row 2:  >00  >01        >1F

    Row 3:  >00  >01        >1F

    Row 4:  >20  >21        >3F

            ...

And the pattern table would look like this (letters a-z represent the
color of a given box, i.e. a digit in the range \>0-F):

    Byte:       0   1    2   3   4   5    6   7
    Row:          0        1       2        3___

    Entry >00: >ab >cd  >ef >gh  >ij >kl  >mn >op

    Entry >01: >qr >st  >uv >wx  >yz ...

    ...

This mode is fairly complicated to use (and does not yield very
interesting results). A way to simplify it is to fill the screen with
fixed character numbers, as shown in the above example. Drawing is then
achieved by changing the color values in the character pattern table.
Arranging the character numbers as in the example makes easier to
calculate which byte must be changed in the pattern table, but there are
other solutions.

###  Bitmap mode (Graphics II)

I'm sure every TI user had this great idea one day or the other: "Hey,
lets fill the screen with all available characters: 0, 1, 2, etc. Then I
can draw pixel-by-pixel by just changing definitions in the character
pattern table". If you have tried, you must have realised there is a big
problem: with 256 characters, we can only cover 1/3 of the screen. Not
to mention the fact that the color table defines 8 characters at a time,
which makes color drawings almost impossible. Bitmap mode takes care of
these problems (sort of).

This mode is selected by setting bit 7 of register 0 as 1. Bits 3 and 4
in register 1 should be 0. VR0: **1** VR1: **0 0**

In this mode, the screen is still devided in 24 row of 32 character,
just as in standard mode. However, we now have *three* character pattern
tables, one after the other: the first table applies to characters
displayed in the top third of the screen (i.e. the first \>100 bytes in
the screen image table), the second to characters displayed in the
middle third (bytes \>100-1FF) and the third to characters displayed in
the bottom third of the screen (bytes \>200-2FF in the screen image
table).

Now we can fully cover the screen with non-redundent characters, by just
writing \>00, \>01, \>02 ... \>FF three times in the screen image table.
As the three pattern tables are consecutive, it is easy to calculate
which byte is to be accessed to modify a given pixel.

There are also three color tables, arranged in the same way as pattern
tables. Each entry in a table is eight bytes long and defines the colors
for one character. Each byte in an entry defines the colors of a row in
the character: the first nibble sets the pixel color for bits that are
set as 1 in the pattern (foreground), the second sets the pixel color
for the 0 bits in the pattern (background). The major drawback of this
system is that each line of pixels in the display is chopped into
8-pixels clusters for which there is only a choice of two colors. This
forces us to pay a lot of attention when drawing complex images, as 3
colors in a given pixel line must be at least 8 pixels appart.

Sprites are available in bitmap mode and work just as in standard mode.

Not so surprisingly, bitmap mode is extremely memory-hungry: it requires
\>3300 bytes, not counting sprite tables.

To summarize, here is an example showing the correspondance between
screen, pattern table entry and color table entry:

       Screen             Pattern table         Color table
    B 1 B B B B B 1      0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1     1 (black)  B (l.yellow)
    B B 7 B B B 7 B      0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0     7 (cyan)   B
    B B B C B C B B      0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0     C (green)  B
    B B B B E B B B      0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0     E (gray)   B
    B B B B 8 B B B      0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0     8 (m.red)  B
    B B B B 5 B B B      0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0     5 (l.blue) B
    B B B B 6 B B B      0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0     6 (d.red)  B
    2 2 2 2 D 2 2 2      0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0     D (magenta)2 (m.green)

The VDP register setting could be the following:
VR0 \>02 Bitmap mode on
VR1 \>C0 16K, screen on
VR2 \>08 Screen image at \>1800 (we can't have it at \>0000 since either
the pattern or the color table must be there)
VR3 \>FF Color table at \>2000, address mask = \>1FFF (full size table:
3 times \>800 bytes)
VR4 \>03 Pattern table at \>0000, address mask = \>1FFF (full size
table: 3 times \>800 bytes)

####  Hybrid bitmap modes

Note that the trick of covering the screen with three repeats of
characters 0-255 is just an easy way to calculate which byte corresponds
to which pixel, this is by no means an obligation. You could use the
tables just the way you do in standard mode: having fixed pattern
definitions (and colors) and placing a character number in the screen
image table to display it. The address masking trick becomes very handy
in this case. Rather than having three copies of the pattern table one
after the other, let's just have one and set the address mask to 0: in
the example above, VR4 would become \>00. The advantage over standard
mode is that we can set different colors for each character (rather than
for a group of 8). In fact, we can even set a color pair for each pixel
row in a character: this is a nice way to create iridescent characters!

Finally, both solutions can be mixed in the various thirds of the
screen: the top two thirds could be arranged for easy bitmap drawing,
whereas the bottom third could be arranged for rapid character writing.
Some games use this solution to display prompts and scores at the bottom
(or top) of the game screen.

You can use the mask bits in register 4 to assign a \>800-byte pattern
table to each third of the screen:
\>00 (or \>04): only one pattern table, identical for each third of the
screen.
\>01 (or \>05): two pattern tables. One at \>0000 (or \>2000) for the
1rst and 3rd thirds, one at \>0800 (or \>2800) for the middle third of
the screen.
\>02 (or \>06): two pattern tables. One at \>0000 (or \>2000) for the
1rst and 2nd thirds, one at \>1000 (or \>3000) for the bottom third of
the sceen.
\>03 (or \>07): three pattern tables. One at \>0000 (or \>2000) for the
1rst third, one at \>0800 (or \>2800) for the 2nd third and one at
\>1000 (or \>3000) for the bottom third of the screen.

Then we could do the same for the color table, using bits 1 and 2
(weight \>40 and \>20) to select the number of tables. The remaining
bits will affect character grouping within a table. Since they also
affect grouping whitin the pattern table, we'd better be carefull with
these!

In summary, these would be the addresses of the tables in 8 possible
situations:

|      |      |        |         |            |            |
|------|------|--------|---------|------------|------------|
| VR3  | VR4  | Mask   | Top 3rd | Middle 3rd | Bottom 3rd |
| \>1F | \>00 | \>07FF | \>0000  | \>0000     | \>0000     |
| \>9F | \>04 | \>07FF | \>2000  | \>2000     | \>2000     |
| \>3F | \>01 | \>0FFF | \>0000  | \>0800     | \>0000     |
| \>BF | \>05 | \>0FFF | \>2000  | \>2800     | \>2000     |
| \>5F | \>02 | \>17FF | \>0000  | \>0000     | \>1000     |
| \>DF | \>06 | \>17FF | \>2000  | \>2000     | \>3000     |
| \>7F | \>03 | \>1FFF | \>0000  | \>0800     | \>1000     |
| \>FF | \>07 | \>1FFF | \>2000  | \>2800     | \>3000     |

To group characters within a table, we could further alter the color
table mask:

- VR3 = \>0F results in \>400-byte tables. This means that characters
  \>80-FF will have the same colors and definitions than characters
  \>00-7F.
- VR3 = \>07 results in \>200-byte tables. This means that characters
  \>40-7F, \>80-BF and \>C0-FF will have the same colors and definitions
  than characters \>00-3F.
- At the extreme, VR3 = \>00 results in \>40-byte tables. As there are 8
  bytes per characters, this means characters are arranged in 8 groups
  of 32 identical characters: chars 0-7 are identical to chars 8-15,
  16-23, etc.
- We could even get weird grouping schemes by using values like \>02,
  \>04, \>55, etc.

The table below lists the six most logical values, plus two gooffy ones
(just for fun).


1=9=17...=249
7=15=23...=255
1=17=33...=241
15=31=47..=255
1=33=65...=217
31=63=95...=255
1=65=129=193
63=127=191=255
1=129
127=255
4=12=36=44...
32=40=48=56=96...

###   Bitmap text mode

This is the mode TI forgot to tell us about. It works just like standard
bitmap mode, except that the screen is now 40 columns and that only two
colors are available.

This mode is selected by setting bit 7 of register 0 as 1. Bit 4 in
register 1 should be 1. VR0: **1** VR1: **0 1**

The screen is now divided in three, each third is 8 lines high and thus
occupies \>140 bytes in the screen image table (8\*40=320).

The colors are taken from VR7, just like in regular text mode. There is
no color table, and the contents of VR3 is irrelevant.

Just like in standard bitmap mode, there can be upto 3 pattern tables,
located either at \>0000 or at \>2000. You can use the address mask bits
in VR4 to determine which third of the screen uses which table. The main
difference is that the color address mask is not used to fill-in the
patten address mask: \>07FF is always used instead. No character
grouping to worry about, then! This mode comes handy for black-and-white
drawings.

###  Bitmap multicolor mode

Another undocumented mode. It works as a mixture of bitmap and
multicolor mode.

This mode is selected by setting bit 7 of register 0 as 1. Bit 3 in
register 1 should be 1. VR0: **1** VR1: **1 0**

The screen is now divided in three, each third is 8 lines high and thus
occupies \>100 bytes in the screen image table (8\*32=256).

Just like in standard multicolor mode, there is no color table and the
contents of VR3 is irrelevant.

The color of the boxes are taken from upto 3 pattern tables, located
either at \>0000 or at \>2000. You can use the address mask bits in VR4
to determine which third of the screen uses which table. Since a single
table would be sufficient for this purpose, there is no real point in
using this combined mode...

###  Illegal modes

It is not allowed to set text and multicolor mode together, whether in
bitmap mode or not. VR0: **x** VR1: **1 1**

If you try, the VDP will display a fixed image, that is not influenced
by the contents of the VDP memory, nor by registers VR2 to VR6 (sprites
are not available). The screen is 192 pixel lines and 40 columns. Each
column is made of 4 pixels in foreground color, followed by 2 pixels in
backgroud color. These two colors are taken from VR7.

###  Sprites

Sprites are special characters that can be displayed at any position on
screen, i.e they are not limited to a grid or rows/column, instead each
sprite position can be defined with a precision of one pixel.

Sprites can be either 8x8 pixels or 16x16 pixels depending on the
setting of bit 6 in VDP register 1: when this bit is 0 all sprites are
8x8, when it is 1 all sprites are 16x16. In addition, bit 7 in VDP
register 1 provides a mgnification feature: when this bit is 1 all
sprites are magnified by a factor of two. Concretely this means that
each "pixel" becomes a 2x2 pixels box.

Each sprite can have its own foreground color. The background color is
always transparent, which lets the underlying image appear under the
sprite.

Upto 32 sprites can be displayed at a time. Each one can be seen as an
extra image plane on the top of the screen, overlapping each others,
with sprite number 0 at the top. Thus the virtual image planes are:
- Black
- External video
- Backdrop plane (color in VDP reg 7)
- Image plane (characters)
- Sprite number 31
- Sprite number 30
- etc upto:
- Sprite number 0

There is one restriction however: the VDP cannot display more than 4
sprites on a given line of pixels. Thus, if 5 sprites or more must be
drawn on the same line, only the topmost four (those with the smallest
numbers) can be displayed. The number of the 5th one is placed in the
status register together with a flag bit and the others are ignored.
This occurs whether or not the sprites are actually overlapping: one
could be on the left of the screen, the other on the right with the same
result.

Coincidence is a different condition: whenever two "on" pixels in
different sprites occupy the same screen location, a bit is set in the
VDP status register. This comes handy for games programming: an easy way
to check whether the bullet hits the target. Note however that the VDP
does not tell you which are the overlapping sprites...

Sprites characteristics are defined in two tables pointed by VDP
registers 5 and 6: the sprite attributes table and the sprite patterns
table.

####  Sprite attributes table

This table is pointed at by VDP register 6. It contains upto 32 entries
for the 32 sprites arranged in numeric order. Each entry is four bytes
long, thus the maximum size for this table is \>100 bytes. The four
bytes define sprite characteristics as follows:

data-cellpadding="2">
Byte 4

Sprite positions are expressed in pixels relative to the top left corner
of the display area. This will be the position of the top leftmost pixel
of the sprite (unless the early clock bit is set, see below). Note that
the vertical position coordinate in the table is offset by one:
therefore the topmost pixel line is \>FF, the second is \>00, the third
is \>01 and the last is \>BE. Any sprite whose vertical position is
greater than \>BE won't be visible on screen, although coordinates close
to \>FF can result in the bottom of the sprite appearing at the top of
the screen. Similarly, row values just under \>BE result in partly
blending off the bottom of the sprite.

The same thing is true for sprite approaching the right border of the
screen (horizontal coordinates close to \>FF): the sprite appears to
blend-in from the right. However this won't work on the left of the
screen: when the horizontal position is 0 the whole sprite is visible,
when it's lower than 0 (i.e. \>FF, \>FE, etc), the sprite appears at the
right of the screen. To allow for sprite blend-in from the left of the
screen one can set the "early clock" bit (bit 0, value \>80) in the
color byte: the horizontal coordinate now refers to a point located 32
pixels to the right of the upper left corner of the sprite. This results
in shifting the sprite 32 pixels to the left and allows for partial
disappearance on the left side (but not any more on the right).

The pattern number refers to the entry containing the sprite pattern in
the sprite pattern table.

Finally the sprite color is defined by the right nibble in the byte 4 of
the entry.

The sprite attributes table does not need to define all sprites: if the
vertical position of a sprite is set as \>D0, the sprite won't be
displayed (as it's off-screen), but neither will any of the following
sprites. This comes handy to quickly erase all sprites by just changing
one byte in the attributes table.

####  Sprite pattern table

This table contains patterns to be used by the various sprites, arranged
in ascending order. Each entry is either 8 bytes long or 32 bytes long
depending on the sprite size.

If the sprite size is set as 8x8, entries are 8 bytes long. Each byte
defines a row in the sprite: "1" bits result in pixels of the color
specified for that sprite in the attributes table, "0" bits encode
transparent pixels and are ignored for display purposes.

If the sprite size is set as 16x16 (VDP register 1, bit 6 set as 1) each
entry is 32 bytes long. These bytes define the sprite pattern as if it
were made of four "normal sprites" arranged in a 2x2 formation:
1 3
2 4
Thus, bytes 0-7 define the top left quadrant, one byte per line of 8
pixels. Bytes 8-15 define the bottom left quadrant in a similar fashion.
Bytes 16-23 define the top right quadrant, one byte per line of 8 pixels
(which now corresponds to pixels 9-15 of the sprite rows 0-7) and bytes
17-23 define the lower right quadrant.

Even wiith a 16x16 pixels size, 32 sprites require at most \>400 bytes
(32x32). Thus there is room enough for extra sprite patterns and a
sprite can be animated by quickly changing its pattern number in the
attributes table rather than by modifying the sprite pattern table.

##  RAM interface

The VDP could use several types of DRAM chips: 4027-type (4 Kbits),
4108-type (8 Kbits) or 4116-type (16 Kbits). In the TI-99/4A console,
there are 8 TMS4116 RAM chips, installed as shown below. They make up
for 16 Kbytes of VDP memory.

These RAMs are organised as a matrix of bits: the TMS4116 has 128 row x
128 columns. The VDP uses 3 command lines to control the RAMs: to select
a row, it places the row number on AD0-AD7 (AD0 is always 0) and pulses
the RAS\* line low so that the RAM can latch the address. Similarly, the
CAS\* line is used to select a column number. Once the address of a bit
has been set the each RAM will issue the corresponding bit on its DOUT
pin. If it is a read operation, the VDP can just access the data on pins
RD0-RD7. For write operations, the VDP can write bits to the selected
address by pulsing the R/W\* line low: each RAM chip will store one bit
at the selected coordinates.

In between operations, the VDP refreshes the RAMs by systematically
selecting each row and activating the RAS\* line. This is necessary
since DRAMs will "forget" data if they are not read periodically. This
normally requires a special refreshig circuit, but in our case the VDP
takes care it.

  +-----+      +----+    +----+    +----+    +----+    +----+    +----+    +----+    +----+
  | R/W*|------|W*  |----|W*  |----|W*  |----|W*  |----|W*  |----|W*  |----|W*  |----|W*  |
  | RAS*|------|RAS*|----|RAS*|----|RAS*|----|RAS*|----|RAS*|----|RAS*|----|RAS*|----|RAS*|
  | CAS*|------|CAS*|----|CAS*|----|CAS*|----|CAS*|----|CAS*|----|CAS*|----|CAS*|----|CAS*|
  |     |      |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
  |  AD7|------|A0  |----|A0  |----|A0  |----|A0  |----|A0  |----|A0  |----|A0  |--+-|A0  |
  |  AD6|------|A1  |----|A1  |----|A1  |----|A1  |----|A1  |----|A1  |--+-|A1  |--|-|A1  |
  |  AD5|------|A2  |----|A2  |----|A2  |----|A2  |----|A2  |--+-|A2  |--|-|A2  |--|-|A2  |
  |  AD4|------|A3  |----|A3  |----|A3  |----|A3  |--+-|A3  |--|-|A3  |--|-|A3  |--|-|A3  |
  |  AD3|------|A4  |----|A4  |----|A4  |--+-|A4  |--|-|A4  |--|-|A4  |--|-|A4  |--|-|A4  |
  |  AD2|------|A5  |----|A5  |--+-|A5  |--|-|A5  |--|-|A5  |--|-|A5  |--|-|A5  |--|-|A5  |
  |  AD1|------|A6  |--+-|A6  |--|-|A6  |--|-|A6  |--|-|A6  |--|-|A6  |--|-|A6  |--|-|A6  |
  |  AD0|--,   |    |  | |    |  | |    |  | |    |  | |    |  | |    |  | |    |  | |    |
  |     |  &#39;---|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |  &#39;-|DIN |
  |     |  ,---|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|  ,-|DOUT|
  |  RD0|--&#39;   +----+  | +----+  | +----+  | +----+  | +----+  | +----+  | +----+  | +----+
  |  RD1|--------------&#39;         |         |         |         |         |         |
  |  RD2|------------------------&#39;         |         |         |         |         |
  |  RD3|----------------------------------&#39;         |         |         |         |
  |  RD4|--------------------------------------------&#39;         |         |         |
  |  RD5|------------------------------------------------------&#39;         |         |
  |  RD6|----------------------------------------------------------------&#39;         |
  |  RD7|--------------------------------------------------------------------------&#39;
  +-----+

###  Address derivation

This fairly complicated table is an attempt to explain how the VDP
generates the 14-bit RAM addresses, according to the video mode and the
table to be accessed.

Table accessed

Standard
Screen image
VR2, bits 4-7
Row (0 to 23)
Column (0 to 32)
Color
VR3, bits 0-7
Char #, bits 0-4
Char pats
VR4, bits 5-7
Char #
Char pat row
Text
Screen image
VR2, bits 4-7
Text position: (Row * 40) + Column
Char pats
VR4, bits 5-7
Char #
Char pat row
Multicolor
Screen image
VR2, bits 4-7
Row
Column
Char pats
VR4, bits 5-7
Char #
Square row, 5-7
Bitmap
Screen image
VR2, bits 4-7
Row
Column
Color
3rd
Char #
Char pat row
Char pats
3rd
Char #
Char pat row
Sprites
Attributes
VR5, bits 1-7
Sprite #
Param
Pats

VR6, bits 5-7
Sprite #
Sprite pat row
VR6, bits 5-7
Sprite #, bits 0-5
Quadrant
Sprite pat row

Notes:
**VRx**: VDP register x. The least significant bits are used, except
in bitmap mode (MSB = \>2000, others = mask).
**3rd**: Third of the screen. 0=upper, 1=middle, 2=lower (3 never
occurs).
**Param**: 0=pixel row-1, 1=pixel column, 2=Pat \#, 3=color (+clock
bit)
**Quadrant**: 0=upper left, 1=lower left, 2=upper right, 3=lower right
(8x8 pixels each)
In bitmap mode, the resulting address for the color and char pats tables
is ANDed with an [address mask](#address%20mask). See the discussion of
[bitmap mode](#hybrid%20bitmap) for details.

##   CPU interface

The TMS9900 CPU communicates with the VDP via an 8-bit data bus and
three control lines.

The CSR\* line signals a read operation and instructs the VDP to place a
byte on the data bus. According to the value of the MODE line, this byte
can be the content of the status register (MODE is high) or a byte
transfered from the VDP RAM (MODE is low). Reading the status register
resets its content, readind a byte from the RAM increments the internal
address pointer in the VDP, so that the next operation will return the
next byte in RAM.

The CSW\* line signals a write operation and instructs the VDP to latch
the byte currently on the data bus. The MODE line is used to
differentiate data bytes (MODE is low) from command bytes (MODE is
high). Writing a byte to the RAM increments the address pointer in the
VDP, so that the next byte will be written to the next address in RAM.
Command bytes are always passed as a pair, the two most significant bits
of the second byte indicates the type of command: \>80 to write to a VDP
register, \>40 to set the address for a RAM write operation, and \>00 to
set the address for a RAM read operation. If the first byte was sent by
mistake, one can cancel it by reading the status register.

In the TI-99/4A the MODE line is connected to address line A14 (weight
\>0002). CSR\* is triggered by any operation with even addresses in the
range \>8800-8BFE, whereas CSW\* is activated by a write operation to an
even address in the range \>8C00-8FFE. Traditionally, the following four
ports are used to communicate with the VDP:

\>8800 Read next byte from the VDP RAM and increment the address
pointer.
\>8802 Read the status byte from the status register, resets it, and
clear interrupt.
\>8C00 Write a byte to the next address in the VDP RAM and increment the
address pointer.
\>8C02 Send a command byte to the VDP (commands must be a pair of
bytes).

The three possible commands are the following:

|                       |             |             |
|-----------------------|-------------|-------------|
| Command               | First byte  | Second byte |
| Write to register     | Reg content | 1 0 Reg#    |
| Set address for write | A6-A13      | 0 1 A0-A5   |
| Set address for read  | A6-A13      | 0 0 A0-A5   |

You will have noticed that commands are 2-byte long. The VDP maintains
an internal flag to know whether the first byte has already arrived.
Once the second byte arrives, the command is executed. It is of
importance to realize than any access to the data port (\>8800 or
\>8C00) or to the status port (\>8802) will reset this flag. This was
probably done so that you can put the VDP in a known state in case
something went wrong with programming: otherwise the only way to reset
the byte flag would be a hardware reset! This is why interrupt must be
disabled during VDP operations: since the interrupt service routine
accesses the VDP it would cancel any pending command if an interrupt
occured in-between the two bytes.

The VDP maintains only one internal address pointer, for both reading
and writing. You could thus wonder why we must tell the VDP whether we
are setting the address for a read or a write operation. This is because
the chip contains a 1-byte read-ahead buffer. As soon as the address is
set for a reading operation, the VDP gets the relevant byte from the RAM
and stores it in the read-ahead buffer. It then increments the reading
pointer. This way, when the CPU finally asks for the byte value (from
port \>8800), the VDP can provide it immediately. It then fetches the
next byte and has it ready for the next CPU request. This read-ahead
strategy considerably speeds up reading operations.

By contrast, when the CPU sets an address to write, all the VDP does is
to update its internal address pointer. When the CPU provides the new
byte value (at port \>8C00), the VDP places it in the RAM and increments
the address pointer.

###  Timing issues

The VDP needs 2 microseconds to read or write a byte to its RAM. In
addition, it can only communicate with the CPU at precise moments, when
it is not too busy with building the screen. Such moments are known as
CPU access windows and may arise at various intervals depending on the
video mode. In standard or bitmap mode, a window occurs every 16 memory
cycles, each cycle being 372 ns long. This means the VDP may have to
wait upto 5.95 us before a CPU access window occurs. Adding the 2 us
needed for RAM access gives us a maximum delay time of 8 us. Of course,
it can be as fast as 2 us if a window just happens to open (even less
for reading operations, thanks to the read-ahead buffer). In text mode,
a window opens every three memory cycles, i.e. at intervals of 1.1 us.
In multicolor mode, a window opens every four memory cycles, i.e. at 1.5
us intervals.

There are two exceptions to these rules, however:

When the screen is blank (because bit 1 in register 1 is set as 0) the
VDP does not handle the screen and a CPU access window is permanently
open. Consequently, there is no wait time.

When the VDP is done with drawing a frame and enters vertical refresh
mode it issues an interrupt (if enabled) and opens a 4.3 milliseconds
(4300 us) window for CPU access.

delay
for a window

/ Bitmap

Contrarily to standard memory, the VDP cannot hold the CPU in a wait
state until it is ready to accept/send data. This means that the
application program must contain appropriate delays to prevent the CPU
from going on with the next operation before the VDP has completed the
current one. A typical example is passing the two command bytes to the
VDP: using two successive MOV instructions is too fast and the second
byte won't be read. The program should thus contain another instruction
in between the two MOV (such as a NOP or a SWPB).

###  Programming examples

* VDP write to register.
* Expects register # in R0 MSB and register content in R0 LSB
*------------------------------------------------------------
VWREG  ORI   R0,&gt;8000     Set command bits as 1xxx xrrr
CMD    SWPB R0            Send a command to the VDP
       MOVB R0,@&gt;8C02     Send first byte (least significant)
       SWPB R0            Delay
       MOVB R0,@&gt;8C02     Send second byte (most significant)
       B    *R11
*------------------------------------------------------------
* VDP set address to write in RAM
* Expects address in R0
*------------------------------------------------------------
VAD2WR ANDI R0,&gt;7FFF     Make sure command bits are 01xx xxxx
       ORI   R0,&gt;4000
       JMP  CMD          Send command
*------------------------------------------------------------
* VDP set address to read from RAM
* Expects address in R0
*------------------------------------------------------------
VAD2RD ANDI R0,&gt;3FFF     Make sure command bits are 00xx xxxx
       JMP  CMD          Send command
*------------------------------------------------------------
* VDP write byte to RAM
* Expects data byte in R0 MSB and address set by VAD2WR
*------------------------------------------------------------
VWRBYT MOV  R0,@&gt;8C00    Send data to VDP
       B    *R11         Delay
*------------------------------------------------------------
* VDP read byte from RAM. Assumes address was set by VAD2RD
* Result will be in R0 MSB
*------------------------------------------------------------
VRDBYT MOV  @&gt;8800,R0    Get data byte
       B    *R11         Delay
*------------------------------------------------------------
* VDP read status. Result will be in R0 MSB
*------------------------------------------------------------
VRDSTA MOV  @&gt;8802,R0    Read status register, resets bits 0-2.
       B    *R11         Delay

##  Monitor interface

### Monitor plug

         6


Looking into the cable (invert left + right for console socket)

European consoles (TMS9929A VDP)

    #  Use
    -  -----
    1  +12V
    2  R-Y
    3  Sound output
    4  Y
    5  B-Y
    6  GND
US consoles (TMS9918A VDP)

    #  Use
    -  -----
    1  +12V
    2  Ground
    3  Sound
    4  Composite video
    5  Signal ground

### Colors and gray levels

The composite video signal from the TMS9918A can drive a color monitor.
It incorporates chrominance, luminance and all necessary vertical and
horizontal synchronisation. The output buffer for the COMVID pin is a
source-follower MOS transistor internally connected to Vcc, which
requires and external pull-down resistor (typically 330 Ohm to provide a
1.9V sync level). This load resistor determines the sharpness of the
edges on the video signals: lower resistance provides faster fall times
and a sharper picture. While the VDP signals are not exactly equivalent
to the NTSC colors, the difference can be easily corrected with the
color and tint controls of the monitor (direct quote from the TI doc).

The Y, R-Y and B-Y video signals from the TMS9928A and TMS9929A require
an external encoding circuitery to drive a RGB monitor. The Y output
signal incorporates the luminance signal and the necessary
synchronisation signals. R-Y (red minus Y) and B-Y (blue minus Y)
contain unmodulated chrominance information and are used in NTSC and PAL
systems to modulate two carriers in quadrature. The output buffers are
identical to the COMVID buffer described above and require the same
pull-down resistor.


TMS9918A
TMS9928A/9929A
(DC)
(AC)
0.00
0.73
0.20

For the TMS9918A, this results in the following hierarchy of gray
levels. These levels differ slightly on the TMS9928A and TMS9929A.

    1        Black
    4        D. blue
    6 C      D.red, D.green
    2 5 8 D  M.green, L.blue, M.red, Magenta
    3 9      L.green, L.red
    7 A      Cyan, D.yellow
    B E      L.yellow, Gray
    F        White

###  Synchronisation signals

The 10.738635 oscillator is used to derive a six-phase internal clock
signal at 3.579545 MHz to provide the video color signal and the color
burst signal used by the TMS9918A. The master clock signal is divided by
two to provide the pixel clock (5.3 MHz), by three to provide CPUCLK
(3.58 MHz for the TMS9918A only) and by 24 to provide GROMCLK (3.58 MHz
for the TMS9928A only).

The pixel clock drive an horizontal pixel counter that in turn drives a
vertical line counter. These counters are used to generate the
synchronisation signals incorporated in COMVID or Y. The TMS9918A and
the TMS9928A operate at 262 lines per frame and approximately 60 frames
per second in non-interlaced mode. The TMS9929A operates at 313 lines
per frame and approximately 50 frames per second.

Horizontal
Pixel clock cycles

Lines
(all modes)
192
24
3
3
13
27
362

##  Timing diagrams

### CPU interface

With CL= 300 pF. All units are nanoseconds (ns) i.e. 10-9
second.
Fcpuclk = 3.4 (min), 3.58(typ), 3.76(max) MHz
Fgromclk= 425.12(min), 447.5(typ), 469.88(max) MHz

#### Write cycle

    __________|          200 ns         |
              \________________________/             CSW*
      |  30  ||  30  |                | |
    XX valid address XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX MODE
                              |  100  | |30 |
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  valid data  XXXXXXXX CD0-CD7

#### Read cycle

    ______
          \___________________________/              CSR*
      | 0 |
    XX     valid address            XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX MODE
          |   100-150  |            | 0 |65-100 |
    -------------------<   valid data   XXXXXXXX>--- CD0-CD7

###   VDP RAM interface

With CL= 50 pF. All units are nanoseconds (ns) i.e. 10-9
second.

#### Write cycle

           |                    >372 ns                       |
           \              190-230 ns                /|100-150 \     RAS*
            |  30-50    |  150-190 ns                |         |
            |           |                         | >45 (65)   |
            |          \|  220-250 ns            /|  80-120 ns   \_ CAS*
            |          95-125 ns             |    |  |
            |     95-130 ns     |            |    |  |
            |-10 to -2| |  240-280 ns        |    |  |
      |25-65|20-30|   | | 45-85 |            |    |  |
    XX     row    XXXX  column  XX    data   XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX AD0-AD7
                        |         |  |135-195|    |  |
                        |         |  |  140-160   |  |
                        |         |a||   60-90 ns    |
                        |           \| 170-210  /     25-75     \   R/W*
                        |      200-310 ns       |

    a) 0-20 ns

#### Read cycle

           |                 >372 ns                   |
           \         190-230 ns                /100-150\     RAS*
            |   30-50   |                  | >45 (65)  |
            |          \   220-250 ns     /   80-120 ns   \_ CAS*
            |    95-130 ns     |           |
      |26-65|20-30|  |a |45-85 |           |
    XX    row     XXX  column  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX AD0-AD7
                                           |>0|
    XXXXXXXXXXXX/                          |  \XXXXXXXXXXXXX R/W*
                                     | >60 |>0|
    XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  data   XXXXXXXXXXXXXX RD0-RD7

    a) -10 to -2 ns

###  Clock interface

#### External clock timing waveform

            42-47-52                                2.75 V
          /          \            /          \             XTAL1
         /            \ 42-47-52 /            \      0.8 V
        |  |           |                    |  |
      x-10-15          | 42-47-52  |      x-10-15
                                   |
           \            /          \            /
            \          /            \          /           XTAL2

    Values given for frequencies: 10.738098 MHz (min)
                                  10.738635 MHz (nom)
                                  10.739172 MHz (max)

###  Monitor interface, TMS9918A

With RL = 470 Ohm and CL= 150 pF
Units are nanoseconds (ns, 10-9 sec), microseconds (us,
10-6 sec) and milliseconds (ms, 10-3 sec)

#### COMVID horizontal timing

        Vwhite                              2.72 us                    2.79 us
                                            /   \        ,~~~,         /   \
    ___                    372ns     1.49us/     \   ,~~~'   `~~~,    /     \
    Vcb Vblack ----,        ,--/\/\/\/\---'       `--'           `~~~'       \______
        Vsync       \4.4 us/    261 us    | |   | |     47.68 us     | |   | |1.49us\____
                  10ns    20ns            60ns  110ns                60ns  110ns
                     Horiz      Color       Left   | Active display  | Right         Horiz
                     sync       burst       border |     area        | border        sync

####  Vertical timing

    __  __  __  __  __  __              __  __  _ _ _ _  __  __  __  __ _ _
      \/  \/  \/  \/  \/  \/\_ ________/  \/  \/       \/  \/  \/  \/
    242 243 244 245 246 247         249 250 251      262    1   2   3
    End bottom | Vertical |  Vertical  |   Vertical back   | Start top
    border     | front    |  sync      |    blanking *     | border
               | blanking*|            |                   |
    ---------->| 191.1 us |  191.1 us  |     828 us        |<--- 18.8 msec --

\* Color burst output suppressed

###  Monitor interface, TMS9928A/9929A

With RL = 470 Ohm and CL= 15 pF

#### Y horizontal timing

       |          Horizontal line:  63.695 usec               |
                            One pixel   __                         Vwhite
                            186.24ns   /  \
                       ______/  \     /    \     ______
    ___        _______/2.8us     \___/      \___/2.42us\______     Vblack
       \4.84us/4.47us                                   1.49us\____Vsync
      ||      ||                     | |  | |
     110ns   150ns                  75ns 50ns
        Horiz   Back   Left  |  Active display | Right  Front  Horiz
        sync    porch  border|  area           | border porch  sync

####  R-Y horizontal timing

    Vwhite                               ___
                                        /   \                 ___
    Vcb            _____               /     \               /   \
    Vno_color ____/2.6us\______       /       \             /     \       __
                  ||   ||1.49us\_____/         \      _ _ _/       \_____/
    Vblack      150ns 100ns     2.8us           \____/              2.4us
    Vsync
                  Color        Left    |  Active display  area   |  Right
                  burst*       border          47.67 usec           border

\* For TMS9929A only

####  B-Y horizontal timing

    Vwhite                                        ___
                                                 /   \
                                                /     \_ _ _               ___
    Vno_color ____         ______              /            \        _____/
                  \       /1.49us\_____       /              \      /2.4us
    Vneg_cb        \2.6us/        2.8us\     /                \____/
    Vblack       | |     | |            \___/
    Vsync       100ns   150ns
                   Color          Left  |   Active display  area   | Right
                   burst*         border          47.67 usec         border

\* For TMS9929A only

####  Vertical timing

    __  __  __  __  __  __ 465ns        __  __  _ _ _ _  __  __  __  __ _ _
      \/  \/  \/  \/  \/  \/\__________/  \/  \/       \/  \/  \/  \/
    292 293 294 295 296 297 298      300 301 302      313      1   2   3
    End bottom | Vertical |  Vertical  |   Vertical back   | Start top
    border     | front    |  sync *    |    blanking *     | border
               | blanking*|            |                   |
    ---------->| 191.09 us|  191.09 us |     828.04 us     |<--- 18.7 msec --
    Vertical time: 19.91 msec

\* Color burst output suppressed

##   Electrical characteristics

### Absolute maximum ratings

Supply voltage, Vcc............................-0.3 to 20 V
All input voltages................................-0.3 to 20 V
Output voltage....................................-2 to 7V
Continuous power dissipation..............1.3 W
Operating free-air temperature.............0 to 70 \`C
Storage temperature range..................-55 to 150 \`C

###  Recommended operating conditions

Parameter

Supply voltage, Vcc
Supply voltage, Vss
Input voltage on
RESET*/SYNC pin
High level
input voltage
Input voltage on
EXT VDP pin
(TMS9918A)
Low level input voltage
Operating free-air temperature

###  Characteristics under recommended conditions

#### All models

Parameter

High level
output
voltage
I=400 uA
Low level
output
voltage
Off-state output current, D0-D7 high
Off-state output current, D0-D7 low
High-level input current
Low-level input current
Video voltage difference, white-black
Y, R-Y, B-Y outputs
Average supply current from Vcc
Input
capacitance
f=11 MHz
other pins at 0V
Output capacitance

####  TMS9918A only


R = 470 Ohm

####  TMS9928A and TMS9929A only


R = 470 Ohm

####  TMS9929A only

Parameter

Color burst video voltage level with
respect to voltage when no color

Preliminary version. 3/31/99 Ok to release
Revision I. 5/22/99. Polished

Revision II. 8/28/99. Added address masking in bitmap mode. Added
mixed + illegal modes.
Revision III. 12/23/01. Corrected bit inversion is status register.
[Back to the TI-99/4A Tech Pages](titechpages.md)
